=== PAGE 9 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
5 
 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Our Agenda: Life Safety First 
We are people who have made our careers in live entertainment, who have experience and 
expertise, who take our jobs seriously so that other people may safely have fun.  
 
In just the last few years, we have seen lives shattered as outdoor stages have collapsed in 
Alberta and Ottawa, in Tulsa and Indianapolis, in Belgium, in Toronto.  Other outdoor structures 
have been no less affected.  More people died when a bar's party tent blew over in St. Louis, 
Missouri, when lightning struck a crowd evacuating a racetrack in Pennsylvania, when a 
temporary advertising scaffold fell outside a Cape Town, South Africa concert venue.  For each 
fatality, many times that number were hurt, property was destroyed, and lawsuits often followed. 
 
Particularly after the August 2011 collapse of the temporary stage roof structure at the Indiana 
State Fair, industry professionals began talking about why these tragedies happened and what 
could be done to prevent them. Starting in January 2012 at Tour Link, then Pollstar Live!, then 
the International Association of Venue Managers' Academy for Venue Safety & Security and 
Severe Weather Planning and Preparedness course, a group of us decided to take matters into our 
own hands.  The Event Safety Alliance includes tour managers, event producers, engineers, 
riggers, equipment lessors, roadies, safety specialists, and many more.  We are people of action.  
It is not in our nature to sit idly by when there is work to be done. 
 
Our conversations focused on operational best practices and decision-making within the live 
entertainment industry.  We realized that the sort of event safety manual we were talking about 
had been relied upon in the United Kingdom since 1999.  Once we concluded that we did not 
have to invent this wheel ourselves, we pooled our collective knowledge and experience to 
update and supplement the U.K.s Purple Guide.   
 
Our mission is to promote life safety first -- to set forth in easily understood language the best 
operational practices currently available in the live event industry, and to make the awareness 
and application of life safety the highest priority of industry professionals.  This Event Safety 
Guide is our first collective effort toward that goal. 
 
We intend for this Guide to help industry professionals know what safe workplace practices 
might be, to heighten their understanding of the importance of safety in everything we do, and to 
engage in these best practices in their daily work.  Doing the right thing is the best risk 
management we know. 
 
We do not intend for the Event Safety Guide to be a roadmap for lawyers seeking to assign 
liability for tragedies, but we are aware that it can serve that purpose.  The fear of litigation can 
be a strong motivator, and if it serves the cause of safety in this instance, then we are comfortable 
with that ancillary effect, too.   
 
\n\n=== PAGE 11 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
7 
 
1.4 Notice and Legal Disclaimer 
1.4.1 Development Process.  The Event Safety Alliance has created this Event Safety Guide 
through a consensus best practices development process.  This process brings together volunteers 
representing various viewpoints and interests to achieve consensus on safety issues related to live 
entertainment events.  While the Event Safety Alliance administers the process and establishes 
rules to promote fairness in the development of consensus, it does not independently test, 
evaluate, or verify the accuracy of any information or the soundness of any judgment contained 
in the Event Safety Guide.  
 
1.4.2 Disclaimer of Liability.  The Event Safety Alliance of USA, Inc., disclaims liability for 
any personal injury, property or other damages of any kind which may directly or indirectly 
result from the use of or reliance on this Event Safety Guide.   
 
1.4.3 Use of Independent Judgment.  The Event Safety Alliance of USA, Inc., is not 
undertaking to render professional or other services for or on behalf of any person or entity.  
Anyone using this Event Safety Guide should rely on his or her own independent judgment, or, as 
appropriate, seek the advice of a competent professional in determining the exercise of 
reasonable care in any given circumstance.  Reviewing the Event Safety Guide also does not 
replace the need for event organizers to consult with local authorities and emergency services, or 
to follow all applicable laws and regulations. 
 
1.4.4 Enforcement.  The Event Safety Alliance of USA, Inc., cannot, and does not undertake to, 
enforce compliance with the contents of the Event Safety Guide.  Nor does the Event Safety 
Alliance of USA, Inc., list, certify, test, or inspect products, designs, or installations for 
compliance with this document or any others. 
   
1.4.5 Updating.  The Event Safety Guide is intended to be a living document.  That is, the 
particular text of this document may be supplemented, modified, or superseded at any time by 
the issuance of a new edition.  To determine whether a given document is the most current 
version, visit the Event Safety Alliance website at www.eventsafetyalliance.org, or contact the 
Event Safety Alliance at the address listed below.  
 
1.4.6 Copyright.  The Event Safety Guide is copyrighted by the Event Safety Alliance of USA, 
Inc.  It is made available for use by reference in laws and regulations, and for private self-
regulations and the promotion of safe practices and methods.  By making this document 
available for use and adoption by public authorities and private users, the Event Safety Alliance 
of USA, Inc., does not waive any copyrights in this document. 
 
This Guide is based in large measure on HSG195, the U.K.s Event Safety Guide published by 
the Health and Safety Executive. United Kingdom Crown Copyright is duly acknowledged for 
passages which remain unchanged from the original. For practitioners wishing to research 
current guidance on planning safe events in the United Kingdom, please refer to the Health and 
Safety Executives event web site (http://www.hse.gov.uk/event-safety/index.htm). 
 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 14 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
2.0.8 The event organizer is the individual or organization who promotes and manages an event. 
This role comes with many obligations and liabilities and it is the organizers burden to discover 
what those obligations are and the organizers exposure to liability, keeping in mind those 
obligations and liabilities can change event to event, even if an event is replicated at a later date 
in the same location.  
 
2.0.9 Organizers should consider obtaining legal and insurance advice early in the planning 
stage. Items that warrant consideration include: 
 Liability for injuries; 
 Liability for acts or omissions; 
 Liability for financial obligations incurred in responding to major emergencies 
occasioned by the event; and 
 Potential liability for the resultant effects of the event on normal emergency operations. 
 
2.0.10 Planning an event can be complicated. Planning for the reasonably foreseeable risks and 
hazards associated with an event is even more difficult and essential to the events success. 
Before scheduling the event, the organizer should consider the scope of the event, the risks to 
spectators and participants, community impact, and the emergency support required (personnel 
and logistics).  
 
2.0.11 To protect the health, safety and welfare of people attending an event, as well as the event 
staff, contractors and subcontractors working at the event, health and safety has to be managed. It 
is important to plan for effective health and safety management beginning at the same time as the 
planning for all other aspects of the proposed event.  
 
2.0.12 Some form of legislation usually governs or restricts public events or aspects of them. 
Some events, particularly extremely large or high-impact events, may require special state or 
local legislation. On occasion, when an event requires a lot of interaction with the local 
government or when multiple local governments are affected by the proposed event, organizers 
employ firms that specialize in navigating the workings of City Hall to facilitate the permit 
process. While not cheap, this method can be effective.  
 
2.0.13 Organizers should assume the event will need a permit regardless of the size, location or 
timing. Investigate this inevitability earlymany months before the eventto assure 
compliance. The permitting process is always intended to enhance safety and should be viewed 
as such. 
 
2.0.14 Site inspections may be required by several authorities having jurisdiction including the 
fire, building, electrical, and health departments. These inspections and other public services will 
likely have a cost to the organizer. The organizer should always assume the local governments 
policy is User Pays and budget accordingly. Organizers should always do their homework 
before committing to an event and know their obligations and liabilities as well as their 
associated costs to avoid future issues.  
\n\n=== PAGE 16 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
2.1.9 To assist organizers during the planning process there is a series of excellent checklists in 
Appendix A of the FEMA IS-15 Special Events Contingency Planning Job Aids Manual 
(2010, p. A-1).  
2.2 Health and Safety Management 
2.2.1 The key elements of successful health and safety management include:  
 Creating a health and safety policy;  
 Developing an event-specific health and safety plan to ensure the policy is put into 
practice;   
 Organizing an effective management structure and distribution of the policy to include 
the responsible person for monitoring health and safety implementation; and  
 Analyzing and reviewing performance.  
2.3 Health and Safety Policy 
2.3.1 A health and safety policy is a document that demonstrates the organizers commitment to 
health and safety. The policy should contain details and show how the event organizer will put it 
into practice. It should also describe the roles and responsibilities of those people who have been 
given safety duties, such as the event safety coordinator. Even though the policy may delegate 
the authority to do certain things, the ultimate responsibility remains with the organizer.  
 
2.3.2 The organization section of the safety policy should also contain the events informative 
elements, e.g., organizational diagrams, maps, procedures and checklists. Organizational charts 
with relevant contact information should be posted (at least) in the event office showing the 
delegation of safety duties and the identification of people with the authority and competence to 
monitor safety and the resources that are available for health and safety.  
 
2.3.3 The policy should address items including the maintenance of a safe place of work, safe 
working methods, safe access, provision of information, training and consultation with 
employees.  
 
2.3.4 The health and safety policy may relate to a series of events if these are to be organized by 
the same event organizer. An event health and safety policy prepared for a series of events will 
need to be reviewed for each particular event for the organization and arrangements for health 
and safety. 
 
2.3.5 It is important that the health and safety policy defines the hierarchy of health and safety 
responsibility for the duration of the event and shows who is responsible for recording these 
details in the safety policy. (For the purposes of this chapter, the duration of the event includes 
the entire period the event occupies the site, i.e. the beginning of load-in through the completion 
of load-out.)  
 
2.3.6 In some states, the organizer or their agent acting as the general contractor is responsible 
not only for their own violations of federal labor law but also for those violations committed by 
their contractors and subcontractors. According to the US Department of Labor (DOL), by 
\n\n=== PAGE 17 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
13 
 
outsourcing some or all aspects of the execution of an event, organizers do not relieve 
themselves of their legal obligations. Prior to planning an event, it would be wise for organizers 
to become familiar with the risks and liabilities for which they are legally responsible.  
2.3.7 If you or your company has been hired to promote and manage an event on behalf of 
another company or organization (e.g., a charity, club or a corporate client), your company may 
not actually be an employer or have any employees. However, it will still be necessary to 
establish who has the overall responsibility for compliance with local laws to ensure that the 
responsible parties are noted. Although most state laws and federal regulations can now be 
accessed on the Internet, local laws, codes and ordinances are not always found online and may 
need to be requested of local authorities having jurisdiction.  
 
2.3.8 In some instances, events are organized by people or organizations where there is no actual 
producer or employer (e.g., various community events), so there may be no legal requirement to 
produce a health and safety policy. However, there is still a responsibility for the management of 
the public, staff, contractors and subcontractors, etc., on site. Producing such a policy in these 
circumstances is still recommended as it demonstrates diligence and provides a framework 
around which you can manage health and safety at the event.  
 
2.3.9 If an event is to be staged in an existing venue such as an auditorium, rental outdoor event 
space, arena or a sports stadium, the event organizer will need to coordinate with the venue 
management regarding the existing arrangements for health and safety. In this instance, the 
event-specific safety policy would supplement the venues existing policy. 
2.4 Planning for Safety 
2.4.1 Effective planning is concerned with hazard identification and the mitigation or elimination 
of those hazards to reduce or eliminate risks. The amount of time needed for planning will 
depend upon the events size, type, location and duration. For some large events, as much as 6 to 
12 months lead-time is required to plan the event properly. Smaller events can be prepared in 
several weeks. If the organizer is not experienced with event planning, it is recommended they 
allow more time so they are not rusheda hazard in itself. 
2.5 The Phases of an Event 
2.5.1 The process for planning an event can be considered in separate parts. Some people find it 
easier to view the planning process as a progression of the event by the various phases involved. 
With time, most organizers develop a multiphase process they use to divide the tasks of their 
events into segments. For the purposes of this chapter we will use four phases: Planning, Pre-
Production, Production and Post-Production. The below is only an example of the elements that 
may be involved in each phase and should only be used only as a reference. 
 
2.5.2 The Planning Phase is the first order of business for the organizer. This is when RFPs are 
received and replies sent, client relationships are developed, budgets are created and approved, 
funding is acquired, and the design process occursoften including the venue selection and 
permit process. Depending on the organizers method, the operations or production team may be 
\n\n=== PAGE 20 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 The event safety policy statement detailing the organization chart and levels of safety 
responsibility; 
 The event risk assessment (see the Event Risk Assessment section below); 
 Basic details of the event including venue layout, structures, audience profile, 
demographic, venue capacity, duration, food, toilets, trash, water, fire precautions, first 
aid, special effects, access and exits; 
 The site safety plan detailing the site safety rules, site managers and safety coordinator, 
structural safety calculations and drawings; 
 The crowd management plan detailing the numbers and types of staffing, methods of 
working, chains of command and organizational charts; 
 The transportation management plan detailing the parking arrangements, traffic 
management plans, public transportation arrangements, and a description of site vehicles 
and vehicular routes inside the venue perimeter; 
 The emergency action plan (EAP) detailing action to be taken by designated people if 
there is a major incident; 
 The first-aid plan detailing procedures for administering first-aid on site and 
arrangements with local hospitals. 
 
2.7.6 The event safety management plan should be reviewed and updated regularly as new 
information is received before and during the event. It is only necessary to distribute this plan to 
the key members of the event safety team. Take the steps necessary to ensure diligent document 
control so redundant or outdated documents are not mistaken for the final version. Examples of 
document control include prominent color-coding and date and time stamps. 
 
2.7.7 Event safety planning meetings are an ideal way to ensure that the event safety 
management team members are updated on the content of the plan, as well as providing a 
mechanism for ensuring a flow of safety information on a regular basis. These meetings can be 
arranged in the weeks or days leading up to the event. If the event is to take place over a few 
days, e.g., citywide events or multi-day festivals, meetings should take place at least once each 
day of the event to ensure that all of that day's team members have been briefed. 
2.8 Planning for the Post-Production Phase 
2.8.1 During post-production, there is a natural reduction in the number of event staff as well as 
the physical footprint the event occupies. Administrative staff numbers typically reduce down to 
the staff required to manage the events financial wrap up, manage the demobilization of 
administrative assets and prepare the events recap. The operations staff numbers are reduced to 
those necessary to demobilize equipment and vendors, as well as restore the site and perform the 
final walkthrough with venue management.  
 
2.8.2 The frequencies of risks are likely to be reduced during this phase. While the pace of work 
and stress levels are more relaxed for those persons involved in the post-production phase, they 
should remain diligent when it comes to hazard identification and risk management. The daily 
safety meetings should continue and log entries maintained and stored in the event binder.  
\n\n=== PAGE 23 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
19 
 
2.9.13 Persons creating a hazard/risk assessment form can find a variety of examples online. In 
addition, the Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA) has developed a helpful Job 
Hazard Analysis (2002 Revised), which can be found online as OSHA Publication 3071 at 
http://www.osha.gov/Publications/osha3071.pdf. 
2.10 Planning for the Load Out 
2.10.1 When the event has ended, the organizers responsibilities toward health and safety 
remain in place. Ensure that you have considered how the equipment and services will be 
removed from the venue and the stages, tents and roof structures after the events performance or 
period of public access ends. 
 
2.10.2 The same rules apply to the load out as were applied to the install. Ensure that site safety 
procedures are in place during this phase of the event.  
 
2.10.3 A point mentioned above deserves to be reiterated: the load out period can still be a 
dangerous time for an event. People are usually in a hurry to leave and get their equipment off 
site as soon as possible and their haste can increase risk to all persons in the area. When 
considering the load out, consider issues such as available lighting, hunger, dehydration, fatigue, 
staff numbers, contractor workspaces, heavy equipment required, and weather.  
2.11 Organizing for Safety 
2.11.1 It is important to clearly organize the health and safety policy statement in order to clearly 
identify which party has authority and responsibility for the myriad issues that go into the 
creation of a live event.   
 
2.11.2 An effectively organized health and safety policy will highlight competence, control, 
cooperation and communication. 
 
2.11.2.1 Competence is about ensuring that all producers, event staff, contractors, vendors and 
subcontractors working on the site have the necessary training, experience, expertise and 
resources to carry out their work safely. Competence is also about ensuring the right level of 
expertise is available, particularly about specialist advice. 
 
2.11.2.2 Ensure that the vendors, contractors or subcontractors you intend to hire are competent 
in managing their own health and safety when working on site. Vendor health and safety policies 
and state and federal incident databases may be checked for information about the vendors 
existing operational practice. If there are no policies in place, this may simply mean the vendor is 
in the stage of developing their policies, or worse, they have not considered a health and safety 
policy. Depending on the law of the state in which the event is being held, the general contractor 
The load out period can still be a  
dangerous time for an event. 
\n\n=== PAGE 25 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
21 
 
during the Post Production Phase is to help the event management team assess safety 
performance against the standards set in the event safety policy.  
2.13 The Safety Coordinator  
2.13.1 Event organizers will likely need competent help in creating and applying the provisions 
of health and safety policies. A competent person is someone who has sufficient training, 
expertise, experience or knowledge and other qualities that enable that person to devise and 
apply protective measures. The exception may be smaller events when the organizer is 
competent to devise and apply protective measures themselves, although on large events most 
organizers will not have the capacity performance-wise to simultaneously produce the event and 
actively execute the duties of the safety coordinator. 
 
2.13.2 It is recommended the organizer appoint a suitably competent safety coordinator to help 
the organizer comply with health and safety legislation. The safety coordinator should report 
directly to the organizer to eliminate the filtering of information by third parties. A safety 
coordinator can assist with the: 
 Preparation and monitoring of site safety rules; 
 Selection, information sharing and monitoring of contractors; 
 Liaison with contractors, event staff and the health and safety enforcement authority on 
site; 
 Checking of safety method statements and risk assessments; 
 Communication of safety information to contractors on site; 
 Checking of appropriate training and certificates required of certain staff and equipment 
such as structures, electrical, and heavy equipment operators;  
 Monitor and maintain observation over the site for evolving hazards, the mediation of 
those hazards and reporting procedures for inclusion into the event log book; 
 Monitoring and coordinating safety performance; and 
 Coordinating safety in response to a major incident. 
 
2.13.3 The safety coordinator should have access to all safety documentation supplied by the 
contractors and organizer. The safety coordinator also needs to be easily available to workers on 
site from load in through load out. The safety coordinator should also be a member of the event 
safety management team. 
 
2.13.4 The safety coordinator should not have other competing roles which would divert his or 
her attention during the event. For example, event organizers should generally not appoint 
themselves as the safety coordinator. 
2.14 Auditing and Reviewing Safety Performance 
2.14.1 Once the event is completed the organizer and the relevant team members should perform 
an audit reviewing the systems used and the documents in the log book to establish that 
appropriate safety management arrangements were in place, adequate risk control systems 
existed and that they were put into practice. It is good practice to schedule this audit after every 
event so any problems identified in the planning, organization or any matters that evolved during 
\n\n=== PAGE 30 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
3. Major Incident (Emergency) 
Planning 
3.0.1 Planning any event can be complicated. Planning for the potential risks and hazards 
associated with an event is even is essential to the events success. This chapter covers the issues 
that should be addressed in the early stages of planning, promoting or sponsoring an event.  
 
3.0.2 By making decisions, agreeing on actions and gathering and documenting useful 
information before an incident occurs, emergency planning helps ensure that event organizers 
and emergency personnel are able to respond quickly and effectively. 
 
3.0.3 Before scheduling the event, consider the risks to spectators and participants, community 
impact, and the emergency support required (personnel and logistics). Also identify the lead 
agency and members of the planning team. 
3.1 Preparation 
3.1.1 The first concern with emergency planning is to identify times when the event may most 
foreseeably strain existing public safety agencies. Even in the earliest stages of planning, the 
organizer should begin to make contingency plans. These plans should consider licensing and 
regulations, emergency response issues, identifying persons responsible for responding to 
particular types of hazards and risks, resources and expenses, and jurisdictions.   
 
3.1.2 During the initial planning stages, each agency should review resources to ensure that all 
necessary equipment is available when the event will be held. If the agencies determine that 
additional equipment is needed, then they may acquire the equipment or supplies and be ready 
for the event. Given enough lead time, communities may be able to work together or pool 
equipment.  
 
3.1.3 One way in which agencies work together is by adopting a mutual aid program. This 
program allows neighboring communities to pool resources and share liability for damages or 
loss of equipment. If one community needs a particular piece of equipment, it may borrow it 
from a neighboring community. The equipment will become an asset of the borrowing 
community and will be covered under their insurance until it is released and returns to its home 
organization. It is important that those involved in planning the event know the agreements 
established between neighboring communities and the assets that are available to assist in 
responding to any unforeseen incidents. These agreements may already be established and 
included as a part of the local emergency operations plan. 
 
3.1.4 As recent events have shown, the consequences of a major incident at a music event can be 
catastrophic. A major incident will normally require a multi-agency approach in which the event 
organizer, law enforcement, ambulance service, fire authority, local authority, local emergency 
\n\n=== PAGE 44 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
Fig. 4-1  Marked fire aisle to door. When loading, moving and storing 
equipment and equipment containers, it is easy to forget that an aisle 
must remain open for egress. Marking the aisle with bright tape helps 
remind everyone that an aisle must be maintained to allow for access to 
the exit. Keeping the marked area completely clear is an important part of 
an effective safety culture. Photo courtesy of Steve Lemon. 
of safety. However, the audience may underestimate the risk or be reluctant to use exits with 
which they are unfamiliar. It is essential to train stewards (see Chapter 38, Glossary of Useful 
Terms, for definition) to recognize this fact and to ensure that the audience leaves promptly 
through the safest exit. This is yet another reason why ALL exits must be well marked/signed 
and lighted and why it may be important to notify the audience (through sound system or 
stewards) of the exits that should be used. 
 
4.3.3.4 Information concerning fire safety for temporary structures used for entertainment 
purposes, which includes marquees, large tents and other membrane structures, can be found in 
local fire and building codes. However, before a permit to erect a tent or membrane structure will 
be issued (and permits will be required), expect that the fire authority having jurisdiction will 
require a certificate executed by an approved testing laboratory (approved by the fire authority 
having jurisdiction) certifying that the tents and membrane structures and their appurtenances, 
sidewalls, drops and tarpaulins, floor coverings, bunting and combustible decorative materials 
and effects, including saw dust when used on floors or passageways, are composed of material 
meeting the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701, Standard Methods of Fire 
Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles and Films. 
 
4.3.3.5 Elevators, escalators and moving walks must not be used as a component of a required 
means of egress from any part of a building. 
 
4.3.3.6 Any stairway, lobby, 
corridor or passageway (exit 
access, exit, or exit discharge), 
which forms part of the means of 
egress from the venue, must be 
unobstructed, of an approved 
minimum width, and constructed 
and arranged so as to provide a safe 
escape for the people using it. The 
aggregate capacity of stairways 
should be sufficient for the number 
of people likely to have to use them 
at the time of a fire. It is also 
necessary to consider the 
possibility of one stairway being 
inaccessible because of fire and the 
aggregate width should allow for 
this possible reduction. The width of 
any element of a means of egress 
must be computed, established and 
authorized by the local fire and 
building authorities having 
jurisdiction.  
 
\n\n=== PAGE 70 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
66 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
5.4.8 An emergency medical technician (EMT) responds to emergency calls, performs certain 
medical procedures and transport patients to hospital in accordance with protocols and guidelines 
established by physician medical directors. They may work in an ambulance service (paid or 
volunteer), as a member of technical rescue teams/squads, or as part of an allied service such as a 
fire or police department. EMTs are trained to assess a patients condition, and to perform such 
emergency medical procedures as are needed to maintain a patent airway with adequate 
breathing and cardiovascular circulation until the patient can be transferred to an appropriate 
destination for advanced medical care. Capabilities include cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(CPR), defibrillation, controlling severe external bleeding, preventing shock, body 
immobilization to prevent spinal damage, and splinting of bone fractures. 
 
5.4.9 Certified first responders (CFRs)(a.k.a. Emergency Medical Responders) in the U.S. 
can either provide emergency care first on the scene (police/fire department/park rangers) or 
support emergency medical technicians and paramedics, provide basic first aid, CPR, automated 
external defibrillator use, spinal immobilization, oxygen administration, and assist in emergency 
childbirth (in some areas they are trained in the use of suction and airway adjuncts). CFRs can 
also assist with administering glucose, aspirin, and epi-pens and are trained in packaging, 
moving and transporting patients. CFR is considered a higher level of medical training than basic 
first-aid (first-aider) and a lesser level of training than an EMT. The American Red Cross now 
offers the Emergency Medical Response course, which fits this definition. In the U.S. in 2012, 
the term Emergency Medical Responder began replacing the term Certified First Responder.  
 
5.4.10 A first-aider is a person who holds a current certificate of first-aid, usually at the 
advanced first-aid level, such as provided by the American Red Cross. To be effective at a live 
event, the first aider should have prior training or experience in providing first aid at crowd 
events. In the United States, there is no universal schedule of first aid levels that are applicable to 
all agencies that provide first aid training. Training is provided typically through the American 
Red Cross, but may also be conducted by local fire departments and, for CPR and automated 
external defibrillator (AED) use, the American Heart Association (AHA).  
 
5.4.11 An appointed medical provider is a competent organization chosen by the event 
organizer, to provide overall management of medical, ambulance and first-aid services at an 
event. 
5.5 Medical, Ambulance and First-Aid Provision 
5.5.1 Following the risk assessment and agreement on levels of medical, ambulance and first-aid 
coverage, event organizers would do well to memorialize those conclusions to which the relevant 
parties indicate their agreement. Ensure that a suitable skills mix exists and that medical, 
ambulance and first-aid providers are located effectively throughout the site. 
 
5.5.2 The decision on the level of medical provision and whether the ambulance service will be 
directly involved, or not, at any particular event will depend on a near infinite number of factors. 
Some of the more foreseeably important factors to consider include: 
 Size of audience; 
 Nature and type of event and entertainment; 
\n\n=== PAGE 75 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
71 
 
5.8 Medical, Ambulance and First-Aid Provision 
5.8.1 It is recognized that medical coverage at events can be organized in different ways and that 
the most appropriate model will vary according to the medical provider and the nature of the 
event. The following tables set out one method of estimating a reasonable level of resource. 
 
5.8.2 It is emphasized that these figures may require modification as some providers may choose 
to substitute medical staff or paramedics for first-aiders. In any case, the suggested levels of 
resource are intended only as general guidance and should not be regarded as prescriptive. The 
tables are not a substitute for a full risk assessment of the event. Figures do not take account of 
dedicated medical personnel for performers or VIPs and do not incorporate the availability of 
alcohol at the event as a relevant factor. 
 
 Use Table 5-1 to allocate a score based on the nature of the event. 
 Use Table 5-2 to allocate a score based on available history and pre-event intelligence. 
 Use Table 5-3 to consider additional elements, which may affect the likelihood of risk. 
 Use Table 5-4 to indicate a suggested resource requirement. 
 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 80 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
6. Communication 
6.0.1 Effective communication is of prime importance if an event is to run smoothly and safely. 
Communication requirements of all the organizations involved in the event, assessed individually 
or jointly, need to be examined thoroughly. This includes examining the general and operational 
management of the event, handling routine health, safety and welfare information and 
communicating effectively in the event of a major incident. 
 
6.0.2 This chapter explores key communication issues from two main perspectives: internal 
communication, and public information and communication. 
6.1 Internal Communication 
6.1.1 Communication During the Event Planning Phase 
6.1.1.1 The communication network during this phase is wide and involves a range of 
communication activities and information requirements: 
 Intelligence gathering about the event characteristics, etc. 
 Seeking appropriate licenses 
 Preparation of detailed plans for arrangements on and off site 
 Commercial arrangements - ticketing policy, publicity, contracts, etc. 
 
6.1.1.2 Everyone involved in the planning of an event will need to keep proper records of 
decisions and ensure that relevant information is communicated to others. It is particularly 
important that statement of intent documents are clear in their definition of roles and the 
responsibilities of different agencies and individuals. 
6.1.2 Preparation of Key Support Documentation 
6.1.2.1 Clear language is crucial in providing reliable communication. Avoid jargon and 
acronyms wherever possible. Where they are necessary, it is worth including a glossary of terms 
within the main planning documents. 
 
6.1.2.2 Agree on special terminology to be used by people preparing plans, documents and 
communication procedures in relation to: 
 Naming different control points and control workers;  
 Labeling different types of rendezvous and collection points; 
 Providing unique reference labels for key locations within and around the venue;  
 Naming conventions for categories of people involved on site;  
 Compatible terminology for assessing risks and grading levels of urgency; 
 Contact protocols for establishing communication. 
 
6.1.2.3 Wherever possible, plans should say who does what, not just what is to be done. For 
example, the incident control room must be informed, is not as helpful as, the duty officer 
must inform the incident control room. 
\n\n=== PAGE 82 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
6.1.6 Radio Communication 
6.1.6.1 Identify and coordinate all radio frequencies for the event. 
 
6.1.6.2 Each organization requiring radio communication will need to consider what operational 
channels are necessary for identified functions or areas. In addition, emergency services will 
have to consider the need for command channels at large events. 
 
6.1.6.3 Radio is an important medium for general operational requirements and a prime medium 
for responding to emergencies. Pre-event checks are therefore essential. Carry out full perimeter 
tests to ensure coverage is adequate. At an outdoor site, appropriate positioning of masts, 
antennae and repeaters may require research and testing. 
 
6.1.6.4 The issuing of full ear-defending headsets should be considered for key workers in high-
noise areas. 
 
6.1.6.5 Fully charge all batteries at the start of the event. Adequate numbers of spare batteries 
and charging facilities are essential. 
 
6.1.6.6 All employees equipped with radios should be formally trained in the use of the assigned 
device(s), all proper operating protocols and procedures, and a procedure for dealing with an 
open mic, a situation that locks everyone out of a channel or talk group. An open mic 
procedure could be as simple as, Should there be an open mic for more than 30 seconds, switch 
to backup channel (or talk group) X until further notice 
6.1.7 Telephone Equipment 
6.1.7.1 Provide and clearly mark external lines for emergency telephone contact between the 
venue control points and off site emergency services. The location of this equipment must be 
known to key venue management personnel. Cell phones can quickly become unusable when a 
major incident occurs, and if an emergency call must be made it is important to know where the 
hard line is. Do not use external telephone lines designated for emergency use for other 
communication. 
 
6.1.7.2 Field telephone networks (or internal telephone networks in a venue such as a sports 
stadium or arena) provide vital links between on-site communication controls and other key 
points around the venue. Cell phones are widely used and provide extra communication options. 
However, they should not be relied upon for important links and especially not used for 
emergency communication.   
6.1.8 Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) 
6.1.8.1 A high-resolution CCTV system can provide real time situational awareness at any event, 
but may be most useful at large, well-attended and wide area events. When designed and 
deployed properly, a CCTV system allows event management to view and assess crowd 
dynamics at key areas such as stages, ingress and egress points, campsites and parking lots. A 
CCTV system that includes recording capability can also be highly beneficial in support of 
security services and potential litigation that may arise.  
 
\n\n=== PAGE 83 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
79 
 
6.1.8.2 Certain fundamental questions regarding CCTV are worth asking and addressing early in 
the event planning stage: 
 Will the use of CCTV make the event safer?  
 Where should cameras be located?  
 Will there be sufficient light? 
 Who should have control over the devices and technology?  
 Who should have viewing access? 
 
6.1.8.3 An effective location for the CCTV control center and operator(s) is adjacent to the event 
command post. All security, health and safety elements of the event should have direct 
communication with the CCTV operator. 
 
6.1.8.4 A qualified CCTV operator should have relevant experience in live event surveillance, 
any specific technology in use, and in assisting security and safety personnel in discovering and 
reporting adverse changes in crowd dynamics and other potentially undesirable and/or unsafe 
situations. 
 
6.1.8.5 Ideally, the CCTV system should have the capability to be able to be viewed remotely.   
 
6.1.8.6 The CCTV system should have the capability of searching and reviewing recorded 
footage to assist in the location of captured activities that could assist in identifying suspects or 
assisting in potential litigation. 
 
6.1.8.7 In terms of the design and deployment of CCTV technologies, service providers should 
initiate and maintain communication with all operations and security elements that might benefit 
from CCTV monitoring. 
 
6.1.8.7.1 Determine which areas of the event should be covered and what type of camera to 
install that will best achieve the goals of that coverage. 
 
 
6.1.8.7.2 Determine any areas that may need observational and archival support. 
 
6.1.8.8 Areas to consider deployment of CCTV coverage include, but are not limited to, the 
following: 
 Stages - Monitor front of stage crowd dynamics, monitor density of crowd in stage arena.  
Assist security dispatch needs. 
 Arena - Monitor crowd flow and density; assist security dispatch needs. 
 Gates and Entrances - Monitor ingress and egress; assist security with identifying ticket 
scalping and other front of venue issues 
 Camp Grounds - Monitor compliance of campers with safety regulations; assist security 
and campsite operations with camper flow. 
 Parking - Monitor ingress and egress; assist security with surveillance; assist parking 
management with the determination of vehicle flow and capacity. 
 Production Gates - Create a record of all vehicles entering and exiting the site. 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 92 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
7.5 All-Clear and Determination of Event Continuation/Cancellation 
7.5.1 Once a weather situation has moved past the event, an All-Clear should be declared.  
The organizer needs to consult with local authorities, technical staff, security and other relevant 
parties to determine if the event can proceed safely. Particular attention must be given to 
temporary structures which may have been compromised by the weather. 
 
7.5.2 Organizers should have professional relationships with first responders. An effective severe 
weather response is likely to include coordinated efforts with first responders. 
 
7.5.3 In the event that there is serious damage to the interior or exterior of the venue, the best 
decision is to terminate or cancel the event. If there is serious damage, evacuation of people in 
shelters or remaining at the event site should be conducted in a safe manner. This may require 
delaying movement until it is safe to do so or using safe routes. 
7.6 Post-Incident Analysis 
7.6.1 It is valuable to have a post-incident review as soon as possible.  Information gained may 
be helpful for future events and incident audits by local authorities or insurance providers. 
Typically engineers, meteorologists and other technical professionals work together provide 
these services. 
7.7 Training and Resources 
7.7.1 Training is an essential component of an event or venues preparedness for severe weather. 
Preparedness planning must include all components of the events operations and production; 
and, training must be provided to managers and supervisors, security, event and operations staff, 
artists, production staff, and anyone else who may be involved in event operations. 
 
7.7.2 The International Association of Venue Managers (IAVM) offers a helpful guide titled 
Severe/Hazardous Weather Preparedness Plan and Guideline. The guide gives venue and event 
managers important tools and was written by venue management professionals with the 
assistance of top experts from the National Weather Service, the insurance industry, and legal 
counsel specializing in public assembly venue issues.  Visit https://www.iavm.org/ for more 
information. 
 
7.7.3 The IAVM also offers a 2-day course titled Severe Weather Preparedness & Planning for 
Public Assembly Venues and Events, which held annually at the National Weather Center in 
Norman, Oklahoma. The course teaches how to develop a severe weather preparedness plan for 
all types of public assembly venues, fairs, expositions, and other events where large crowds 
assemble. Visit https://www.iavm.org/ for more information. 
 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 105 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
101 
 
during an incident. Consideration should be given to making the ICP  large enough to 
incorporate and support emergency response decision makers should the incident require it.  
 
8.4.23.2 According to NIMS ICS, there is only one ICP for each incident, and every incident or 
event must have some form of an Incident Command Post.  
8.5 Helicopter Use at the Event Site 
8.5.1 When designing an open field site, public service agencies will require access for 
emergency vehicles, and this may include one or more helicopters. It is incorrect to assume that a 
helicopter can land anywhere and it is a dangerous myth that a helicopter can land on any open 
area on or near an event site. The safe landing of an aircraft takes careful planning and 
consideration. If planning to use helicopters, it would be prudent to refer to FAA Document 
AC150/5390-2C, Heliport Design. 
 
8.5.2 The Incident Command System (ICS) defines a helispot as a designated location where a 
helicopter can safely take off and land. In contrast, a helibase is the main location for parking, 
fueling, maintenance, and loading of a helicopter operating in support of an incident or event. A 
helibase is usually located at an airport or airfield, whereas a helispot is usually a temporary, off-
airport location established for takeoff and landing. Although terms like helipad and landing 
zone are sometimes used, a helispot is what is usually built at an event site and is the term used 
in this discussion. Please note that the FAA uses the term heliport to describe a place where 
helicopters take off and land. In this discussion, a heliport is the same as a helispot. 
 
8.5.3 There are many variables a flight crew will consider before landing including security of 
the space, terrain, soil, lighting, loose debris, trees/foliage, electrical towers, wires and more.  
 
8.5.4 When including a helispot into a site plan, organizers and site planners need to consult the 
authority having jurisdiction over the event, agencies and/or vendors who may land helicopters 
on the site and the flight crews expected to use the facility. It may also be prudent to research 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements, although flight personnel will be a good 
source of this type of information. (see FAA Document AC150/5390-2C, Heliport Design.) 
 
8.5.5 Consider whether the evacuation of ill and/or injured patients may be required. 
Transporting patients to the helispot will require careful consideration and may include access by 
ambulance.  
 
8.5.6 If transporting talent by helicopter, the success of the overall event will depend entirely on 
suitable facilities and safe air operations. If the event plan calls for transporting talent by air, 
organizers must also make contingency transportation plans for the artists. Meteorological 
conditions and flight visibility can be unpredictable and limit the use of aircraft.  
 
8.5.7 If the event will incorporate air operations, it is strongly recommended that a competent air 
operations team be assembled to manage the system. This team should be included in the 
drafting of the events health and safety policy and their operations will have a significant impact 
on the risk assessment. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 109 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
105 
 
behavior and the general event management. Some sports teams will draw problematic fans as 
will some types of artists or concerts. Organizers should do their homework on the target 
audience of the event they are producing and apply during the planning process the knowledge 
gained. This information should also be freely shared with the venue and all health, safety and 
security managers. 
9.4 Entrances and Exits 
9.4.1 Ensure that entrances and exits have clearly posted signage, which reflect venue policies 
and procedures and operate efficiently. Consider the needs of children and people with 
disabilities and separate entrances and exits for pedestrian access from entry routes used by 
emergency services and concession vehicles. Provide information to the audience about any 
restricted exits that are not in use while the event is in progress (see Chapter 8, Venue and Site 
Design, for more information on entrances and exits). 
9.4.2 Pre-Opening Considerations 
9.4.2.1 Events that are general admission (GA) should expect attendees to arrive earlier than an 
event with reserved seating. In some stadium or open field events, the GA ticket holders may 
arrive even the day prior to the event. Organizers should consider how many persons may arrive 
early and plan for what additional infrastructure requirements will be needed by the presences of 
those persons, e.g., sanitation facilities, waste management and security.  
9.4.3 Entrance Preparations 
9.4.3.1 One of the more exciting moments on event day is the opening of doors and preparing 
for that moment is no small task. Streamlining the entry process for the crowds smooth entry is 
important and should include: 
 Informational signage alerting arriving fans to the events prohibited items policy that 
may cause a delay at a the venues entry point; 
 A soft ticket check as patrons enter the chutes leading to the venue entry point not only 
verifies the fan has a ticket- it makes sure they know where the ticket is and can shave 
seconds per person at the entry; 
 Event staff with megaphones walking the lines offering information and reminders on 
event policies can save time and also passively alerts ticket holders there is a strong staff 
presence at the event; 
 If the event is selling alcohol, ID checks and wrist-banding can be done in the line just 
before the venue entry point; 
 Methods of streamlining the ticket holder search process at the entry point can include 
additional lanes, additional tables for bag checks and additional positions for pat-down 
searches; however without trained and experienced staffing there to support the 
additional load capacity the effort is wasted; 
 
9.4.3.2 All streamlining processes generally require additional staffing which, of course, is not 
free. Organizers must balance the increased efficiency of adding staff with the additional cost as 
they consider their options. 
\n\n=== PAGE 112 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
108 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
9.6.3 Ticket-Only Sales 
9.6.3.1 The advantage of confining entry to ticket-only is that the rate of admission should be 
higher than for cash sale. If tickets are sold at the event, provide separate sales outlets wherever 
possible. Ensure that these outlets are clearly signposted and positioned so that queues do not 
conflict with queues for other entry points. 
9.6.4 Reserved (or Numbered) Seat Ticket Sales 
9.6.4.1 Selling tickets for specific numbered seats has its advantages: seats are more likely to be 
sold in blocks and the system allows different categories of audience members (e.g., parent and 
child) to purchase adjacent seats and enter the venue together. This policy helps to avoid random 
gaps and ensures that in the key period before the event there will be less need for ushers to 
direct late-comers to the remaining seats, or move members of the audience who have already 
settled.  
9.6.5 Unreserved Seat Sales 
9.6.5.1 Selling unreserved seats has the advantage of being easier to administer. However, people 
are prone to occupy seats in a random pattern, and it can be hard to fill unoccupied seats before 
the start of the event. For this reason, when seats are sold unreserved, a reduced number of seats 
made available for sale may be necessary (in the region of 5-10% of total capacity, according to 
local circumstances). 
9.6.6 No Ticket Sales on Site 
9.6.6.1 If all tickets have sold out in advance, or if tickets are not sold on site, every effort should 
be made to publicize this fact in the media. In addition, place signs advising people of the 
situation along all approaches to the event, to avoid an unnecessary build-up of crowds outside. 
This is a preferred method for likely sell-out concerts. 
9.6.7 Ticket Design 
9.6.7.1 Ticket design can have a direct effect on the rate of admission. Clear, easy-to-read 
information will speed the ability of the entry-point steward/usher to process the ticket. 
Similarly, if anti-counterfeiting features are incorporated (as is recommended), ensure that there 
are simple procedures in place for the event staff to check each tickets validity. If digital tickets 
are displayable on smart phones, ensure that the staff can interpret all valid ticket formats to 
speed the seating times and reduce confusion. 
9.6.8 Admission of Young Children 
9.6.8.1 It may not be appropriate to allow young children, particularly those under the age of five 
years, to attend certain events because they may be trampled or crushed. If they are not to be 
allowed in, clearly advertise this fact in advance. Where young children are allowed, consider 
arrangements for baby carriers and strollers, and at large events, dedicated childrens areas may 
be useful. Consider contingency planning for dealing with this element of the audience, such as 
relocation to a specific area. Ensure a procedure is in place for stewards to assist with such 
relocation.  
\n\n=== PAGE 113 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
109 
 
9.6.9 Re-Entry  
9.6.9.1 The practice of re-entry generally enables audience members to leave the event for a 
short time and return later that day. An example of this is when a visitor to a theme park visits 
the park in the morning during the cooler hours, then takes a break and departs the venue during 
the heat of day, then returns again for the evening hours when it is cool again.  It is suggested 
that most venues not allow re-entry and restrict venue policy to exit, no return status unless 
granted a hand stamp, etc., which can be selectively used. Unrestricted access to re-entry can 
allow patrons to consume alcohol and or drugs in parking lots and vehicles and return to the 
venue in an intoxicated state, which can increase the potential for problems.  
9.6.10 Guest/VIP/Restricted Areas 
9.6.10.1 Separate access points may be needed for particular types of ticket holders such as 
guests and VIPs, artists and their entourage, workers, officials and emergency services workers. 
Consider the location of the gates between these areas and the main arena to prevent any crowd 
build-up at such points. Clear identification of people permitted into such areasusing special 
passes or wristbandswill assist security in controlling admission and in minimizing delays in 
admission, which reduces queuing.  
9.7 Entrance Searches 
9.7.1 Searching at entrances using metal detector wands, walk through metal detectors, or pat-
down searches along with bag checks, may be necessary to prevent prohibited items and 
weapons from being brought on site. A list of prohibited items should be posted at all entry gates 
to allow guests to return the items to their vehicles before the screening process. Arrange for the 
safe storage/disposal of confiscated items. Searching should only carried out by properly trained 
and supervised security personnel.  The initial screening process can be streamlined by keeping 
the chutes moving and immediately sending persons with an issue to a secondary location so 
they do not obstruct the line moving through the chute. 
9.8 Late Leavers 
9.8.1 At the end of the event when most of the audience has left, if practical, stewards, event 
personnel and security can form a line in front of the stage and slowly walk to the furthermost 
exit, moving the remaining audience out of the area. Organizers should consider budgeting for 
the worst case scenario here so increased customer service requirements can be covered should 
they be required.  
9.9 Crowd Sway/Surges 
9.9.1 At large events it is sometimes effective to subdivide the audience into pens, which reduces 
the effects of sway and surge. If this method is used, put a system in place to prevent 
overcrowding. This is accomplished using a T-shaped barricade configuration or other audience 
control barriers. 
 
9.9.2 Think carefully about where to position security and event personnel to monitor the 
audience for distress, crushing, sway, surges, or mosh pits as they all present a risk to the 
\n\n=== PAGE 120 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 Bus and truck parking lots 
 Points where pedestrians and vehicles cross paths 
 Monitoring of unauthorized vending of items 
 Entry line control 
 Soft ticket check 
 ID check 
 Line control 
 Bag check tables 
 Pat downs 
 Magnetometers 
 Secondary screening areas 
 Rovers - both inside and outside the venue 
 Cash locations 
 Cash movements 
 At the head of floor seating aisles and entrances to fixed seating sections 
 Mix platform or control tower 
 Camera platforms 
 Projection towers 
 Pyro and Special Effect locations 
 Storage in public areas 
 Merchandise booths 
 Spotlight platforms 
 Access points to back of house and secure areas like the venue rigging grid 
 Pit in front of the stage 
 Backstage access points 
 Stairs leading to the stage 
 VIP areas 
 Beer gardens 
 Points where access accreditation changes 
 Entrances to hallways or compounds for offices and dressing rooms 
 Office or dressing room doors 
 Meet-n-Greet locations 
 Talent escort 
 Photographer/Media escort 
 Catering/Parking, valuable protection and meal ticket collection 
 Venue perimeter fence 
 Late coverage after the event 
 Overnight 
 
9.14.3 Some posts are only required for short periods, others for the duration of the event. It is 
common for organizers and security companies to manage the available resources and redeploy 
event personnel and security staff to multiple posts during an event.  
 
\n\n=== PAGE 123 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
119 
 
10.1.3 Event organizers should consider the following questions at the beginning of the planning 
phase to help estimate the number and age group(s) of children who may attend their event. 
Asking the right questions will help plan for the presence, needs and safety of children at an 
event. Here are some examples: 
 
 Is it a childrens event and if so, which age group is the target demographic? This answer 
identifies what age groups to plan for and what rides and activities to present. 
 
 Is the event a childrens event where several children may arrive with one parent, 
guardian, chaperone, e.g. a teacher? This answer may impact staffing and parking-
arrivals plans. 
 
 How are the children arriving? Generally it is advisable to plan for a dedicated group 
drop-off location near the venues entry point. If vehicles transporting children drop-off 
out in the parking lot, other cars in the ingress and parking process increase the hazards to 
children as they walk across the parking lot to the entry. This may also slow the parking 
process, as children in groups can become disorganized during the transit from drop-off 
to the venue entry point. Event staffing may need to be increased to help chaperones 
monitor children. 
 
 Are children going to be participants in your event where they or their organization may 
be a part of the event or a featured attraction or paying an entry fee, e.g. a parade, road 
race or competition? This answer may affect the infrastructure required, the food and 
beverages to be served, staffing needed and parking locations. 
 
 Will children serve as talent or performers or as workers at the event as part of a 
volunteer group or paid staff? Child labor laws may come into play. If used as volunteers, 
you may need to communicate more information ahead of time with their organizations. 
All volunteers under the age of 18 will need a parent or guardians signature on the 
appropriate release form. Children often do not carry the information necessary to fill out 
the paperwork required by the federal government, e.g. social security card, etc. For more 
information on the use of volunteers and the US Department of Labor  Fair Labor 
Standards Act (www.dol.gov/elaws/esa/flsa/docs/volunteers.asp).  
 
 Will children be arriving with or working for a vendor who has arranged to sell at your 
event? Authorities are less likely to check for labor law compliance of a vendor if their 
child is accompanying them at an event while the parent is selling. Regardless, it is 
recommended that organizers clearly state in their vendor agreements any expectations 
regarding the vendors liability and insurance requirements. 
 
10.1.4 Once the needs of children at your event are examined, more questions arise. As the 
organizer, you want to know your exposure to risk and mitigate that exposure wherever possible. 
Ultimately, responsibility for safety rolls uphill to the organizer.  
\n\n=== PAGE 124 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
10.2 General Considerations for Children at Events 
10.2.1 Children often accompany adults to events. Consider the presence of children in your risk 
assessment and emergency action plans even if they are not the target demographic of the event. 
 
10.2.2 Event promotional materials should indicate if the event is suitable for children and what 
age groups, or if children under a certain age will not be allowed to enter. 
 
10.2.3 When children attend events, there is always the potential for their separation from 
parents, guardians, or chaperones. Establishing lost child procedures is part of venue and event 
operations when the presence of children is reasonably foreseeable. See section 10.7, Lost and 
Missing Children, below for additional information. 
 
10.2.4 Facilities should contain changing tables or other similar accommodation for infants and 
toddlers in restroom facilities.   
 
10.2.5 Venue operating procedures should designate at what age a ticket and/or individual seat is 
required for a child attending an event. This generally is around 2 years of age but venue 
practices and policies vary. Check the customs in your region. 
 
10.2.6 Review safety and code requirements for the safety of children, such as hand railing 
space/opening and guard rails. Conduct an inspection at least annually with the AHJ (fire 
marshal) or insurance inspector, or more frequently if there are changes and adjustments made to 
seating areas or structures. NFPA 102, Standard for Grandstands, Folding and Telescopic 
Seating, Tents, and Membrane Structures, provides useful information and may be a required 
standard in the jurisdiction in which you are operating. 
 
10.2.7 Include childrens needs in your emergency planning and hire or consider identifying and 
training a person to serve as the Childrens Issues Coordinator; a qualified and competent person 
who knows what to do and can give direction when an incident involving a child occurs.  
 
10.2.7.1 Develop policies and plans for the following: 
 The ongoing care of children who are separated from their parents and are unable to be 
quickly reunited, 
 Law enforcement and/or child social services notification, 
 Transportation of children to a safe child-friendly place on site, 
 Supervision for the child while in that child-friendly place, 
 Medical care for children (if necessary), 
 Nutrition for the child while in your care, and 
 A location off site, e.g. a nearby school or multipurpose room, with facilities that can be 
used if there is an emergency and the attending parents and children need to be evacuated 
to an alternate location. You will need a check-in and check-out process, a system for 
leaving messages, and security for unattended/unsupervised children who are now in your 
care.  
 
\n\n=== PAGE 125 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
121 
 
10.2.7.2 Communication to area managers, event staff, and the public, and the instructions they 
are to follow in an emergency situation. Keep in mind that there may be language barriers. Train 
event staff and crowd managers in the procedures and considerations for evacuating and/or 
assisting children in emergency situations. 
 
10.2.7.3 In an emergency, families tend to stay together and the parents or guardians will make 
the decisions regarding their childrens safety. Typically, the parents and guardians usually 
gather the family to make sure all are accounted for and then evacuate as a group or seek 
sanctuary nearby. Preserving family unity is an important step to provide for the physical safety 
and emotional stability of children in disasters.   
 
10.2.7.4 Because family separation can occur even when well-prepared evacuation plans are 
carried out, it is important to identify protocols for reuniting families as quickly as possible. 
 
 
10.2.7.5 If you are an organizer who also manages a venue, it is important to remember that 
during a state of an emergency, your venue may be called upon to serve as a rally or meeting 
point, temporary housing location for refugees, or emergency command center for public service 
agencies. 
 
10.2.8 Events involving predominantly young teen audiences who attend without parents can 
present challenges of a different sort. Problems they experience may include becoming separated 
from their companions, missing the public transportation to get home, and losing items such as 
cell phones and money. Consider providing a Solutions or Help booth with at least one 
telephone so that these young teens can get help or contact their parents or guardians.  
 
10.2.9 Parents sometimes have difficulties finding their children at the end of an event. Consider 
providing a specific, well labeled, meeting point that includes a staffed message facility where 
parents and teens can leave messages for each other. Alternately, offer a dedicated space with 
tables, chairs and other accommodations where parents can spend time at the venue waiting on 
site to collect their children at the end of the event. 
 
10.2.10 The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) applies to the needs of all persons including 
children. Consider the requirements, such as those relating to staffing and equipment, and 
develop a policy for children with special needs to ensure that they can be fully engaged in all 
activities. See Chapter 11, Facilities for People with Special Needs, for more information on 
ADA. 
 
10.2.11 Establish and maintain a temporary holding location and arrange for the safe care of 
children separated from their parents or guardian (a planning consideration for all events). 
 
10.2.12 If your event has a childrens play area, consider at what age you can allow a child to be 
left unattended in the area. There may be guidelines available from the AHJ or Child Protective 
Services (CPS). However, it is a good practice for organizers not to allow children to be left 
alone in their care or unattended by the parents at the event under any circumstances. This policy 
should be posted at all entrances in the applicable languages relevant to the event. For more 
information on laws and guidelines in your events location, contact your local CPS agency. 
\n\n=== PAGE 126 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
122 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
10.2.13 Unaccompanied children should not leave the area unless accompanied by their parent or 
guardian. This is more easily monitored if the area is enclosed with limited entrances and exits 
and there is an effective accountability (i.e., sign-in/sign-out) policy. 
 
10.2.14 Event staff must be familiar with the events policy and procedures for discipline and 
dealing with uncooperative or abusive children or parents. These policies and procedures should 
be coordinated withand ideally approved bylocal law enforcement and the local child 
protective services agency. 
 
10.2.15 Dangerous behavior by children should always be discouraged. 
 
10.2.16 Post your policy regarding sick children at all play area entrances. Event staff should not 
undertake the care of sick children except in situations where a child is separated from his or her 
parent or guardian. 
10.3 Childrens Activity and Play Areas 
10.3.1 Childrens activity and play areas at events are very popular. Regarding the site and layout 
of these areas, consider, and plan appropriately for, the following: 
 
10.3.1.1 When planning the location of the childrens area, the overall events throughput and the 
impact of the location of childrens areas on that throughput must be considered. 
 
10.3.1.2 Position the childrens area near posts for medical and security/law enforcement, food 
and beverages, restrooms, and a plumbed source of water. 
 
10.3.1.3 The maximum capacity of an activity and/or play area should not simply be based on 
the total size of the space. It should take into consideration the layout of space, the available area 
for queue lines, any open space areas, and the capabilities of the staff for each of the activities. 
The maximum capacity of the area should be calculated with input from (and often direction 
from) the AHJ, known by event staff working in the area, posted and enforced. It is usually 
acceptable to have people wait outside the area when the area is at maximum capacity as long as 
it does not obstruct exits or guest flow. If this is necessary, design and establish a contingency 
queue line space outside the entrance of the area. 
 
10.3.1.4 For the safety and security of the children, the layout of the area should accommodate 
one main entry and exit point. Additional emergency exits may be required by the AHJ and those 
passageways may require staffing to monitor and control access. When designing the layout, be 
sure to meet any requirements of the AHJ and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and 
pay attention to the areas proximity to the primary venue exits in case evacuation is required. 
 
10.3.1.5 Survey the play and activity areas for hazards. If hazards are cannot be removed, fence 
them off to prevent access by children. In addition, prevent young childrens access to all open 
and standing water including pools, ponds, streams, fountains, and mud. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 128 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
124 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
10.3.1.17 In hot weather, ice, water, and sunscreen should be available in the play area; consider 
making these items available for purchase. If offering snacks, prepackaged items offer 
convenience. Check with your local health department about regulations regarding food sales. 
 
10.3.1.18 Make sure there is plenty of suitable seating for both the expected age group of 
children and their parents/guardians. 
 
10.3.1.19 Check that stair rails are at appropriate heights on stairs and steps. OSHA 29 CFR 
1926.1052, Stairways, includes several requirements with which event organizers should be 
familiar. For example, when a stair rail is also a handrail, it must be not less than 36 inches 
(0.9144 m) and not more than 37 inches (0.9398 m) from the upper surface of the tread. Also, 
make sure a sphere 4 inches (0.1016 m) in diameter (the head of an infant) cannot fit between 
rail balusters or between the bottom of the rail and the flooring materials. For all construction 
and safety issues like this, consult with the AHJ to establish and apply all local requirements. 
 
10.3.1.20 Check to determine whether the floors in the area are slippery or will be made slippery 
by moisture. If so, mitigate the hazard, and have a plan in place to quickly remove liquids from 
stairways and flooring.  
 
10.3.1.21 Provide suitable food and drink for children in and around these areas. Avoid foods 
known to provoke allergic reactions (such as nuts) and, if these types of food items will be 
offered, post notices that clearly inform the public. 
 
10.3.1.22 Smoking should be prohibited within or near childrens areas. 
 
10.3.2 Clearly indicate that parents and guardians are expected to watch and supervise their own 
children in play areas and that they are responsible for their behavior. Local parks may have 
already developed language you can borrow for this purpose.  
 
10.3.3 The events insurance provider is a good source of information regarding safety in 
general, but they can be particularly helpful with issues related to managing children and 
childrens areas. Keep the insurance representative well informed of the intended activities and 
do not hesitate to ask him or her for advice and information. Insurers will likely have access to 
risk managers who are excellent sources of valuable information. 
 
10.3.4 When planning and operating childrens activity and play areas, your obligations as the 
organizer will vary depending on your location. Consult the local AHJ, Child Protective Services 
(CPS) and other child services agencies for a clear understanding of the requirements and 
responsibilities associated with such an endeavor. 
10.4 Childrens Activity Considerations 
10.4.1 Activities should be age-appropriate. Ensure that a risk assessment for each activity is 
carried out prior to the event and that the staff involved in the activity is fully briefed. Clearly 
display information about potential hazards at all entrances to the area; pictures may be more 
effective for children. 
\n\n=== PAGE 129 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
125 
 
10.4.2 If the activity is a craft such as tie-dying t-shirts or building a model (i.e., something 
requiring some dexterity and skill), expect the parents to engage in the activity along with their 
children. The presence of adults in the area may limit throughput and reduce the capacity for 
children. So, plan for more space if these types of activities are used. 
 
10.4.3 Materials used in childrens play activities should be clean, nontoxic and non-allergenic.  
 
10.4.3.1 Before use, check materials from the scrap pile or recycle bin for cleanliness, suitability 
and any hidden sharp items such as slivers, staples, nails, sharp edges, etc.  
 
10.4.4 For children ages four and under, face painters should only paint childrens cheeks or 
hands and should always acquire parental permission before doing so. Ask face painters for their 
public liability insurance and proof that they are using a reputable brand of non-allergenic, 
water-based face paints.  
 
10.4.4.1 Be prepared to provide information to parents on the safety of the products and about 
removing face paints. 
 
10.4.5 Ensure there is constant supervision for activities that could be potentially dangerous. 
Consider these activities carefully. Some activities with inherent risks, such as woodworking and 
candle making, are not recommended.  
 
10.4.6 The nature, size and operation of recreational equipment and rides to be placed, or already 
located, in the area will need to be evaluated to determine if each piece can remain, must be 
removed, or needs to be fenced off like any other hazard. Play equipment must be safe for the 
age group using it and children need to be closely supervised at all times when using the 
equipment. Post signage identifying the intended age group for the equipment.  
 
10.4.7 Some rides and activities for older children may be best located outside the young 
childrens area. This not only protects the smaller children from larger kids and moving rides, it 
increases foot traffic and customers for any vendors along the route. 
 
10.4.8 Different age groups demand different levels of infrastructure, supervision and types of 
activity. These factors can all affect the design of the layout as well. 
  
10.4.8.1 If mixed age group activities are planned, the planner should consider and plan the 
layout in such a way so as to avoid smaller children being knocked over or accidentally hurt by 
excited older and larger children. 
 
10.4.8.2 For children of 3-5 years of age, knowledgeable and qualified workers should lead the 
activities. The entry point must be supervised at all times to ensure that children do not leave the 
event area unnoticed. There should be access to a nearby quiet rest area in the event that the 
parent/guardian needs time with the child away from the activity.  
 
\n\n=== PAGE 130 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
126 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
10.4.8.3 Children 6-14 years old should have more challenging activities that last for longer 
periods of time. Consider separating these kids into groups of 6-8, 9-11 and 12-14, as these 
groupings coincide with elementary and middle school age groups. 
 
10.4.8.4 The 15-18 year old age group may arrive and not be accompanied by an adult. If your 
event will serve alcohol, consider that it may get into the hands of under aged individuals. 
Institute a method of easily identifying those who are underage such as wristbands for those of 
drinking age and the use of specific types or colors of cups for identifying alcoholic beverages. 
Where children are permitted, non-alcoholic beverages must be available. 
 
10.4.9 Locate rides and amusements on your site in an environmentally and child-friendly space. 
Rides should be appropriate to the age and size of users. Ride operators must have relevant and 
up-to-date certificates for their equipment. Bouncy castle operators must provide proper 
supervision at all times and control the capacity of the units to prevent overcrowding, excessive 
excitement and possible injuries.  
 
10.4.10 All items used by animals should be kept out of the reach of infants and toddlers. When 
an activity includes touching animals or items that come in contact with animals, children and 
parents should be encouraged to wash and/or sanitize their hands immediately after the activity. 
Provide hand sanitizer or hand washing facilities within the animal area and near the exit. 
 
10.4.11 When an injury occurs in the childrens area, the childrens play area manager should 
notify the event command center to alert the event medical team any time a child sustains an 
injury more serious than a minor cut or scratch, and file a report. 
 
10.4.12 Any sand boxes should be inspected regularly and kept free of potentially hazardous 
foreign materials such as glass, broken toys, hardware, twigs/sticks, animal feces, acorns, etc. 
 
10.4.13 Areas beneath climbing equipment, swings, slides and similar equipment should be 
cushioned with material that absorbs energy during falls such as play sand, wood chips, pea 
gravel, shredded rubber, or rubber mats designed specifically for this purpose. Local parks may 
be a good source of suggestions and can help identify suitable materials for your circumstances. 
 
10.4.14 If infant or toddler water activities are proposed, consult with the local authority having 
jurisdiction (AHJ) regarding any required staff-to-child ratios. The following are some examples 
included in the California Health and Safety Code: 
 There shall be at least one adult present who has a valid water-safety certificate on file at 
the event command center. 
 A ratio of one adult to two infants/toddlers shall be maintained during activities in or near 
any body of water. 
 
 A ratio of one staff member to every four infants/toddler shall be maintained during 
activities in or near any container of water that a child can get into and get out of 
unassisted. This could include but is not limited to, wading pools, basins or water trays. 
This staff-child ratio may include authorized representatives of infants/toddlers in care 
and adult volunteers. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 131 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
127 
 
10.4.15 If water activities involving any age of child are proposed, consult with the local AHJ 
regarding any required staff-to-child ratios. The following are some examples included in the 
California Health and Safety Code. 
 
10.4.15.1 There should be at least one adult present with a valid water-safety certificate on file at 
the event command center during water activities in or near any of the following bodies of water: 
 Swimming pool; 
 Any portable pool with sides so high that children using the pool cannot step out 
unassisted by a person or device (including a ladder); or 
 Potentially dangerous natural bodies of water including, but not limited to, oceans, lakes, 
rivers and streams. 
 
10.4.15.2 A ratio of not less than one adult, including teachers, to every six children, or fraction 
thereof, shall be maintained during water activities in or near any of the bodies of water specified 
above. Lifeguards or personnel supervising anyone other than children attending the events 
water activity should not be included in this ratio. 
 
10.4.16 All 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands and the 
Virgin Islands require child safety seats for infants and children fitting specific criteria. If the 
event is offering transportation for infant, toddler or preschool children, the vehicles used must 
be equipped with the appropriate child seats and restraint devices. Drivers of these vehicles 
should also be qualified adult drivers and should be assisted by competent assistant(s) as 
necessary. There should be a well-stocked, age-appropriate first-aid kit in all vehicles, or carried 
by an attending event staff-member if public transportation is being used.  
 
10.4.16.1 The Governors Highway Safety Association (GHSA) has a web site that lists all child 
passenger safety laws by state (http://ghsa.org/html/stateinfo/laws/childsafety_laws.html) and the 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has an informative web site that 
serves as a gateway to information and resources related to keeping kids safe when they are in a 
vehicle (http://www.safercar.gov/parents/). 
10.5 Staffing  
10.5.1 Organizers should consult the AHJ, the local child protection or social services agency, or 
a professional human resource consultant to learn about any requirements and solicit advice and 
suggestions regarding the staffing of childrens areas. These organizations and agencies can also 
provide guidelines regarding adult-to-child ratios and square foot-per-child space standards, 
among other things, for premises where children and childrens activities will be located. 
 
10.5.2 It is best to start the event planning process with an experienced manager/coordinator to 
plan, operate and manage the childrens area: the Childrens Area Manager. Although the full 
scope of any such job will be determined by the size, circumstances and location of the event, 
below are some suggested job responsibilities for the Childrens Area Manager (CAM). 
 Childrens Area Binder  A binder with all the relevant information about the childrens 
area and its policies should be developed and maintained by the CAM. If the childrens 
\n\n=== PAGE 132 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
128 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
area is part of a larger event, a copy of this binder should be made a part of the overall 
event binder and filed in the events command center. 
 Risk Assessment and Emergency Planning  A risk assessment of the childrens area 
should be conducted and included in the documentation of emergency and contingency 
plans for the event. 
 Agency Communication  The CAM should liaise and communicate directly with the 
AHJ and the local law enforcement and child services agencies.  
 Design and Activities  The CAM should lead the planning, design and layout of the 
childrens area and the selection of childrens activities and vendors. 
 Equipment  The CAM should lead the selection, and supervise the installing and 
dismantling, of any play equipment used. 
 Policies  The CAM should be responsible for developing and implementing all policies 
concerning the childrens area, which can differ from the main events policies. Often, 
the most difficult policy to define is the procedure for the release of custody of minors to 
parents and guardians. This process is seemingly simple but may be complicated by 
issues such as the adults lack of identification or a parent being drunk or abusive to a 
child or event staff. 
 Staff  The CAM should be responsible for the screening, selecting and training of all 
staff used in the childrens area, as well as their credentialing and scheduling during the 
event. 
 Shelter  The CAM is responsible for arranging a nearby and secure shelter for the 
children in the event of an evacuation.  
 Infrastructure  The CAM is responsible for the planning, installation, operation and 
dismantling of any required infrastructure such as tents, power, food and beverage, 
sanitation, solid waste collection and removal, etc. 
 Staff Communication  Making provisions for communication between the various area 
managers, event management staff and the event command center is the responsibility of 
the CAM. The CAM assumes responsibility for the system and ensures that radios are 
issued to key staff (using cell phone service only as a back-up) to ensure rapid 
communication ability between the managers of childrens areas and other relevant on-
site services such as event management, the event command center (or other dispatch 
services for anything needed), security, other area managers. etc. The CAM and the other 
relevant area managers should be introduced to one another during the pre-event briefing. 
 
10.5.3 General recommendations for staff working in childrens areas, and all event staff who 
may come in contact with children, include the following: 
 The Childrens Area Manager (CAM) for the childrens play area should be competent, 
qualified and experienced in managing such areas. An assistant manager should be fully 
qualified to serve as the manager in the absence of the manager. 
 Although relative youth can be helpful in a CAM and assistant CAM, the CAM should be 
at least 18 years of age and preferably 21 years of age.  
 Photos of all staff working the childrens area should be taken and filed for reference. 
 Criminal background checks are recommended for all persons who will work in this area 
or could come into contact with children, and some states and/or jurisdictions may 
require it. No persons with a known history of child- or violence-related offenses should 
\n\n=== PAGE 133 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
129 
 
be permitted to work in or near the area. It may be helpful to review the National Center 
for Missing and Exploited Childrens publication entitled What You Need to Know 
About Background Screening (http://ric-zai-inc.com/Publications/cops-p260-pub.pdf).  
 All staff working in the childrens area should be medically fit for the assignment and not 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs.  
 Ideally, all childrens area staff should be certified in first aid and CPR, but any time the 
area is operating at least one adult working in the area should have these qualifications. It 
is also a good idea to position an event first aid team either in or next to each childrens 
activity area.  
 Required staff training should include use of radios, emergency scenarios, event safety 
policy, child protection issues, and the reporting policy and procedures. All event staff 
should be trained on the appropriate handling and/or touching of children and how to 
report violations and questionable situations.  
 Event staff must never employ any practices that threaten, frighten or humiliate children. 
 Event staff must never engage in corporal punishment (i.e., spanking, slapping, shaking, 
etc.). Corporal punishment is a criminal offense in some states. It is advisable for 
organizers to require event staff witnessing corporal punishment of any child, even by the 
childs parents or guardians, to report it. 
 
10.5.4 Records requirements for those who work with children will vary based on state and 
local jurisdiction. Contact the AHJ, local child protective services, or professional human 
resource consultant for information regarding required documentation for employees and 
volunteers who will work with children. It is always a good idea to collect and maintain 
employee and volunteer records related to position within the organization, job 
description/duties, and number of hours worked or volunteered. In addition, it is recommended 
that the following information be collected and retained for each employee or volunteer: 
 Employees full name; 
 Drivers license number and type, especially if the employee is to transport children; 
 Date(s) of employment; 
 A statement signed by the employee that he/she is at least 18 years of age; 
 Employees current home address, phone number(s), and email address; 
 Documentation of employees educational background, training and/or experience; 
 Employees experience, including types of employment and former employers; 
 A health screening and tuberculosis test of the employee, if required by the AHJ; and 
 Documentation of the employees criminal record check and clearance. 
 
10.5.4.1 The maintenance of certain personnel records may be required by some authorities 
having jurisdiction (AHJ) for volunteers working in the childrens area. Some examples of these 
requirements include the following: 
 A health statement such as the one required by Section 101216(g) of Californias 
DSS/CCL Evaluators Manual Procedure; 
 Tuberculosis test documents such as those specified in Section 101216(g)(3) of 
Californias DSS/CCL Evaluators Manual Procedure; 
 Fingerprints of volunteers who are required to be fingerprinted by the AHJ;  
 A signed statement regarding their criminal record history if required by the AHJ; 
\n\n=== PAGE 134 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
130 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 Documentation of either a criminal record clearance or a criminal record exemption if 
required by the AHJ. 
 
10.5.5 All event workers and volunteers working around children should be clearly identifiable 
through the use of credentials, uniform clothing (e.g., t-shirts, caps, vests), and other unique and 
difficult to duplicate methods. This combination of unique and easily recognizable attire and 
credentials should quickly identify each individual to both the children and the parents as a 
trusted adult. If funding for uniforms and/or signage is an issue, consider finding a sponsor.  
10.6 Detention and Release of Minors 
10.6.1 Event organizers should have a written policy for handling security issues involving 
minors. These issues should be addressed during the pre-event planning meeting by the event 
organizer, a representative of the venue and the AHJ.  
 
10.6.2 When handling minors under the influence of alcohol or drugs, it is inadvisable for the 
crowd management team to simply eject the underage guests from the venue. Event organizers 
should consult with the AHJ before establishing their minor detention policy. The venue and/or 
AHJ will likely already have a policy regarding this issue of detaining minors; if not, they will 
still be able to help guide organizers and crowd management contractors in proven methods and 
best practices for that location.  
 
10.6.3 If minors are detained by event staff, they should be held in a supervised area separate 
from adult detainees until they can be passed to law enforcement, a child protective services 
agency or are released to their parent/guardian. 
 
10.6.4 Any person, especially a minor, requiring detention should be immediately handed over to 
law enforcement by event staff. For this reason, effective radio communications are important 
between area managers, crowd management and the event command center, all of which should 
have direct access to law enforcement.  
 
10.6.5 The terms of release of a minor should be determined in advance by the AHJ and the 
venue. These terms should be included in the event policy with at least specific guidelines on the 
following: 
 The policy regarding which entity is responsible for the minors detainment and welfare 
while on site; 
 The procedure regarding notification of parents/guardians and law enforcement; 
 The procedure for a minor requiring medical attention or with a condition that requires 
transport to a medical facility; 
 The policy regarding who is authorized to take custody of a minor and the conditions 
under which they are allowed to do so; and 
 Reporting procedures. 
\n\n=== PAGE 135 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
131 
 
10.7 Lost and Missing Children 
10.7.1 A child found separated from his or her parents or guardian and the report of a missing 
child by parents or guardians are two of the most distressful and emotional situations an event 
organizer may experience. However, they are extraordinarily common and occur at virtually all 
events. Thus, understanding and planning for such situations is necessary and important. 
 
10.7.2 Event organizers should be familiar with the vernacular used by experts who deal with 
lost and missing children. The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children 
(www.missingkids.com) generally defines a missing child as a person less than 18 years of 
age, whose whereabouts are unknown to his or her custodial parent, guardian, or responsible 
party (p. 2, Law Enforcement Policy and Procedures for Reports of Missing and Exploited 
Children: A Model, 2011). The NCMEC goes on to define an at risk missing child as being 13 
years of age or younger or believed or determined to be experiencing one or more of the 
following circumstances (pp. 2-3): 
 Is out of the zone of safety for his or her age and developmental stage; 
 Has mental or behavioral disabilities; 
 Is drug dependent, including prescribed medication and/or illegal substances, and the 
dependency is potentially life-threatening; 
 Has been absent from home for more than 24 hours before being reported to law 
enforcement as missing; 
 Is in a life-threatening situation; 
 Is in the company of others who could endanger his or her welfare; 
 Is absent in a way inconsistent with established patterns of behavior and the deviation 
cannot be readily explained; or 
 Is involved in a situation causing a reasonable person to conclude the child should be 
considered at risk. 
 
10.7.3 In contrast to the too common missing child scenario most familiar to law enforcement, 
search and rescue personnel refer to a person as lost when he or she is disoriented as to 
location and unable to find a preferred location. Children who have been temporarily separated 
from their parent or guardian at an event likely fit this definition. But, combine this with the 
often young age of the child (i.e., at risk is 13 years of age or younger) and it becomes clear 
that the situation should be addressed quickly to keep it from escalating to a tragedy.  
 
10.7.4 Discovering a child separated from his or her parent or guardian is a common occurrence 
and can usually be resolved quickly. However, during that time of separation, the event staff will 
play a key role in maintaining the childs physical security and emotional stability. Event staff 
involved in the handling of lost children should be fully briefed and trained in exactly what to do 
and how to do it.  
 
10.7.5 When a child is discovered who appears to be lost, the National Center for Missing and 
Exploited Children (NCMEC) recommends the following (which can be found online at 
www.missingkids.com/en_US/publications/PDF15A.pdf): 
 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 139 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
135 
 
10.7.7 Relevant staff training and scenario planning discussions related to lost and missing 
children should be conducted in advance of an event. A procedural checklist that described the 
exactly what should be done and by whom should be created, kept in the event binder, and 
distributed to everyone with responsibilities on the checklist as well as the AHJ. The AHJ or 
local child protective services agency may have helpful information on procedures that will work 
well in their region. This checklist should contain, and the event supervisory staff should be 
familiar with, the following: 
 How to identify a child who may be separated or lost. 
 How to approach and make verbal contact with a child and listen carefully (remember the 
child may not speak English); refrain from touching the child until a second staff member 
arrives. 
 Instructions directing the staff member who makes the first contact with the child to 
remain with the child through the entire process, until custody of the child is assumed by 
the parent/guardian, law enforcement or other agency. 
 How to calm a frightened child (or parent/guardian). 
 Steps to be taken to minimize the duration of the separation such as immediately 
scanning the area for a parent/guardian who might be looking for their child. Keep in 
mind the parent may not be able to see the child because the child may be short.  
 The process of alerting ones supervisor and/or the event command center of the 
situation, and the requirement that they wait for a second event staff member or law 
enforcement to join them before relocating the child to a holding area.   
 The implementation of the events policy regarding lost child announcements.  
 The policy regarding relocating the child to a secure, controlled, child friendly place 
while assuring the child that he or she is safe and going to be okay. 
 How to entertain children while being cared for and waiting to be retrieved.  
 How to determine an adult is the true parent or guardian of the child for whom they are 
seeking custody.  
 The procedures to follow in the event that the collecting parent or guardian appears unfit 
to take custody of the child (e.g., drunk, angry, violent). Consult the local child protection 
agency for guidelines and advice. 
 When it comes to handing over a child to the parent or guardian who may be unfit to take 
custody, event staff should avoid making judgment calls on their own. Instead, they 
should contact another event staff member to witness the proceedings and discretely 
summon law enforcement to assist with the situation.  
 Staff may be faced with the rare and delicate situation of a found child resisting the 
person claiming to be their parent/guardian. The staff member should contact the event 
command center and request immediate back-up assistance from another staff member. 
The command center should immediately notify the childrens area manager, law 
enforcement and/or the crowd management team. The staff member should remain calm 
and stall if possible until authorities arrive or try to keep the parent and child in sight until 
law enforcement arrives. The staff member should consider offering to take a picture of 
the couple and sending it to them as a goodwill gesture. This could come in handy later 
on. 
 Dealing with an excited or angry parent/guardian. If the discussion with an adult over a 
child should become heated, no staff member should place themselves in danger. Instead, 
they should report the incident immediately and turn it over to law enforcement. 
\n\n=== PAGE 153 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
149 
 
12.5 Pedestrians 
12.5.1 Generally speaking, pedestrians sharing the same space as any mode of transportation 
with wheels should be avoided where alternative routes are available.  
 
12.5.2 Identify safe means of entry and exit for pedestrians, ideally segregated from vehicular 
access. Where pedestrian access is difficult, consider the provision of alternative means of 
access, e.g., shuttle buses to collect pedestrians en route. Consider making specific arrangements 
for those attending who have a physical disability and may not be able to walk long distances. 
Avoid entry and exit routes crossing parking lots and traffic routes. Where the latter is 
unavoidable, plan for adequate traffic control measures. 
12.6 On-Site Vehicle Management and Temporary Roadways 
12.6.1 It is important to minimize traffic movement within the site and conflicts between 
vehicles and pedestrians. Consider moving vehicles into the parking areas as efficiently as 
possible and having a dedicated access to parking areas with no ticket checks on entry. In some 
circumstances, ticket checks can be undertaken on pedestrian exits from the parking into the 
event area. This may, however, not be practical for camping events. 
 
12.6.2 Restrict traffic movement in the event arena to emergency service vehicles and other 
essential services. Consider speed restrictions on site and plan separate access for production 
vehicles. 
 
12.6.3 Temporary roadways are useful to allow suitable hard-surfaced access for pedestrians and 
service vehicles. Plan temporary access roads, ideally to provide for two-way emergency access 
or one-way with passing places and working space as appropriate. All on-site vehicles must 
display adequate lighting during darkness and remember to keep pedestrian and vehicle conflict 
points to a minimum. Plan how vehicles delivering equipment and provisions enter and exit the 
site safely during the load-in and load-out of the event. 
 
12.6.4 Where vehicle routes change from those arranged at planning stage, due to heavy rain or 
some other unforeseen circumstance, make sure that arrangements are in place for reinforcing the 
alternative route. Vehicle recovery from soft ground should be planned. 
12.7 Vehicles 
12.7.1 Forklifts 
12.7.1.1 No one should be permitted to operate a forklift unless they have been trained and 
authorized to do so.   
 
12.7.1.2 Trained operators will have a certificate from an accredited organization indicating the 
type of forklift for which they have received training. A certificate to drive one forklift does not 
qualify an operator to drive other types of forklifts. Do not allow workers to operate forklifts 
without checking that they are fully trained for the type of truck they are to use. Confirm that 
your event labor provider is supplying trained and certified operators. 
\n\n=== PAGE 155 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
151 
 
13. Food, Drink and Water 
13.1 Catering Operations 
13.1.1 To the extent possible, ensure that the delivery, storage, preparation and sale of food 
complies with the relevant food safety regulations and relevant industry standards. This will 
include mobile catering units, catering stalls and tents, crew catering outlets, hospitality catering, 
bars and ice cream vendors, etc. 
 
13.1.2 In an effort to ensure that food businesses carry out their work in a safe and hygienic way, 
the event organizer can request evidence from each caterer regarding: 
 The identification and control of potential food hazards by all catering operations; 
 The identification and control of potential health and safety hazards by all catering 
operations; 
 Provision of appropriate fire extinguishers;  
 Proper training of all food handlers, including obtaining a food handlers permit where 
required; 
 The suitability of all premises used for the production or sale of food;  
 The suitability of the equipment being used; 
 Transporting food safely and separate from any potential source of contamination; 
 Storing and disposing of food waste (solid and liquid) properly; 
 The maintenance of high standards of the personal hygiene of food handlers; 
 The proper storing, handling and preparation of food; 
 The provision of a drinking water supply (see section 13.7); 
 Insurance of all food businesses including public, product and employers liabilities; 
 The possession of electrical and gas installation compliance certificates by all food 
businesses; and 
 The possession of a properly equipped first-aid box by each operating unit. 
 
13.1.3 Where needed, contact the local authority environmental health officers (EHOs) for 
advice on food safety and hygiene. EHOs may wish to carry out an inspection of the catering 
facilities provided at the event. They may also require you to provide them with a list of caterers 
who will attend the event. 
 
13.1.4 Additional requirements may be necessary in certain types of catering operations, e.g., 
barbecues and spit roasting. Such operations may present an increased risk of fire, contamination 
or food poisoning. Ensure that a suitable risk assessment is carried out, taking into account the 
particular factors of the operation. 
13.2 Positioning 
13.2.1 The site plan of the event must include a detailed layout of all catering operations (see 
Chapter 8, Venue and Site Design), bearing in mind the need to: 
\n\n=== PAGE 158 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
154 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 The type of containers that drinks are served in conform to any site/event specifications 
(e.g., no glass policy); 
 There is a suitable means of disposal for glass bottles, used to decant drinks before 
serving; 
 Bar areas are kept free of litter and the floors are cleared of spillages; and 
 If a token system is used instead of cash, the change areas need to be separate from 
the bar service area. 
13.7 Drinking Water 
13.7.1 The provision of free drinking water is important at all events, especially open-air 
concerts and dance events, due to the volume of people, confined conditions and the weather. 
 
13.7.2 Generally all water should be provided from a water main supply, but if this is not 
possible then water tanks are permissible provided they are suitable for the purpose. All water 
dispensing equipment should be clean, well maintained and suitable. It is considered good 
practice to sample and test temporary water supplies for bacterial safety, especially those 
provided at outdoor events. 
13.7.3 Pit Area 
13.7.3.1 There should be an adequate supply of drinking water points in the pit area, together 
with an adequate supply of paper or plastic cups. The number of drinking water points will be 
determined by the risk assessment. 
 
13.7.3.2 If storage containers are used to supply the water, they should be of sufficient capacity 
and number for the anticipated needs of the people within the first 16 feet (4.9 m) of the pit 
barrier. Pit area water points should not be within the reach of the audience. 
13.7.4 General Area 
13.7.4.1 There must be a supply of drinking water within easy reach of the audience and all 
catering operations. At outdoor sites (one-day events) a general guideline is one water outlet per 
3,000 people and one outlet per 10 caterers provided they are in the same area. 
 
13.7.4.2 All water points should: 
 Have unobstructed access; 
 Be clearly marked; 
 Be clearly lit at night if the event continues after dark; and 
 Have self-closing taps. 
 
13.7.4.3 The ground surrounding all water points should be well drained or provision made to 
bridge any flooded areas. 
 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 159 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
155 
 
14. Sanitary Facilities 
14.0.1 Ensure that adequate sanitary provision is made for the number of people expected to 
attend the event. Consideration should be given to location, access, construction, type of 
temporary facilities, lighting and signage. 
 
14.0.2 The American Restroom Association provides some guidelines online at 
http://www.americanrestroom.org/pr/policy and FEMA offers their FEMA Special Events 
Contingency Planning- Toilets pamphlet, which can also be found online at 
http://www.americanrestroom.org/pr/policy/#fema. 
 
14.0.3 Construct and locate toilets so that people are protected from bad weather and trip 
hazards. The floors, ramps and steps of the units should be stable and of a non-slip surface 
construction. Protect connecting pipe work to avoid damage. 
 
14.0.4 Toilets should be readily visible, lit and clearly signed from all parts of the venue. The 
areas and, where appropriate, the individual units, should be adequately lit at night and during 
the day, if required.  
14.1 Maintenance 
14.1.1 Regularly maintain, repair and service toilets using suitably experienced competent 
workers throughout the event to ensure that they are kept safe, clean and hygienic. Toilets need 
to be supplied with toilet paper, in a holder or dispenser at all times. Some modern units come 
equipped with hand sanitizer dispensers which can relieve some pressure from your hand-wash 
units. Arrangements should be made for the rapid clearance of any blockages. 
14.2 Location 
14.2.1 Where possible, locate toilets at different points around the venue rather than 
concentrating in one small area, to minimize crowding and queuing problems. Consider placing 
toilets outside the perimeter fenced venue area (e.g., parking lots, box office queue lines, event 
campsites, etc.). Attention should be given to access requirements for servicing and emptying. 
This may include the need for temporary roadways and dedicated access routes for pumper 
trucks, subject to the layout of the site. 
14.3 Type 
14.3.1 Where temporary toilets are required, an assessment should be made of the suitability of 
each of the available types of temporary unit, for the nature and duration of the event being 
organized. Consider the perceived peak usage of any toilet units and the time taken for cisterns to 
fill. Rapid and constant use of any toilet can cause the bowls to become unsanitary and prone to 
blockages. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 176 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
172 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
16.10.5 Fabric and Coated Fabric Gloves 
16.10.5.1 Fabric and coated fabric gloves are made of cotton or other fabric to provide varying 
degrees of protection. 
 
16.10.5.2 Fabric gloves protect against dirt, slivers, chafing and abrasions. They do not provide 
sufficient protection for use with rough, sharp or heavy materials. Adding a plastic coating will 
strengthen some fabric gloves. 
 
16.10.5.3 Coated fabric gloves are normally made from cotton flannel with napping on one side. 
By coating the un-napped side with plastic, fabric gloves are transformed into general-purpose 
hand protection offering slip-resistant qualities. These gloves are used for tasks ranging from 
handling bricks and wire to chemical laboratory containers.  
 
16.10.5.4 When selecting gloves to protect against chemical exposure hazards, always check 
with the manufacturer or review the manufacturers product literature to determine the gloves 
effectiveness against specific workplace chemicals and conditions. 
16.10.6 Chemical- and Liquid-Resistant Gloves 
16.10.6.1 Chemical-resistant gloves are made with different kinds of rubber: natural, butyl, 
neoprene, nitrile and fluorocarbon (viton); or various kinds of plastic: polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 
polyvinyl alcohol and polyethylene. These materials can be blended or laminated for better 
performance. As a general rule, the thicker the glove material, the greater the chemical resistance 
but thick gloves may impair grip and dexterity, having a negative impact on safety. 
 
16.10.6.2 Some examples of chemical-resistant gloves include: 
 Butyl gloves are made of a synthetic rubber and protect against a wide variety of 
chemicals, such as peroxide, rocket fuels, highly corrosive acids (nitric acid, sulfuric 
acid, hydrofluoric acid and red-fuming nitric acid), strong bases, alcohols, aldehydes, 
ketones, esters and nitro compounds. Butyl gloves also resist oxidation, ozone corrosion 
and abrasion, and remain flexible at low temperatures. Butyl rubber does not perform 
well with aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons and halogenated solvents. 
 Natural (latex) rubber gloves are comfortable to wear, which makes them a popular 
general purpose glove. They feature outstanding tensile strength, elasticity and 
temperature resistance. In addition to resisting abrasions caused by grinding and 
polishing, these gloves protect workers hands from most water solutions of acids, 
alkalis, salts and ketones. Latex gloves have caused allergic reactions in some individuals 
and may not be appropriate for all employees. Hypoallergenic gloves, glove liners and 
powderless gloves are possible alternatives for workers who are allergic to latex gloves. 
 Neoprene gloves are made of synthetic rubber and offer good pliability, finger dexterity, 
high density and tear resistance. They protect against hydraulic fluids, gasoline, alcohols, 
organic acids and alkalis. They generally have chemical and wear resistance properties 
superior to those made of natural rubber. 
 Nitrile gloves are made of a copolymer and provide protection from chlorinated solvents 
such as trichloroethylene and perchloroethylene. Although intended for jobs requiring 
dexterity and sensitivity, nitrile gloves stand up to heavy use even after prolonged 
exposure to substances that cause other gloves to deteriorate. They offer protection when 
\n\n=== PAGE 185 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
181 
 
18.1 Individuals Involved with Rigging 
18.1.1 Rigging creates life safety hazards that affect almost every person associated with an 
event. Anything dropped or lowered from above can cause serious injury to someone below. 
Large forces and complex structures are often involved, even in small events. The possibility of a 
catastrophic rigging failure must be considered and planned for by all responsible parties.  
 
18.1.1.1 In rigging there can be no compromise in the planning, engineering, equipment, 
maintenance, or qualifications of rigging supervisors or persons performing the work. No person 
should engage in the organization, planning and supervision of work at height or equipment for 
use in such work, unless he or she is competent to do so, or, if being trained, is under the direct 
supervision of a competent person.  
 
18.1.1.2 Rigging is not found exclusively in stage or performance areas. All structures with 
hanging signs, banners, delay speakers or other items are potentially hazardous. All event staff, 
especially supervisors and managers, should be aware of any rigging work in progress, familiar 
with safe site practices, and consider how he or she can contribute to a safe rigging system. 
 
18.1.2 The persons and roles involved with riggingand who may be personally responsible and 
liable for the rigginginclude the following: 
 
18.1.2.1 Event Organizer or Producer. As the general contractor for the event, this person or 
entity is responsible for: 
 Ensuring a professional rigging consultant and/or engineer is involved in all phases of the 
event including a final evaluation of the system prior to commencing operations; 
 Procuring reputable and competent rigging equipment and service suppliers; 
 Verifying that suppliers and individuals involved with rigging are competent to do so and 
have qualifications, training, certifications, insurance and experience commensurate with 
the size and complexity of the event; and 
 Ensuring that appropriate method statements, safety policy documents, contracts and 
insurance are in place before work begins onsite.  
 
18.1.2.2 Engineer. A qualified engineer establishes and approves the capacities and limitations of 
the entire rigging system and how it applies to the events structures. Calculations should always 
take into account and include the operation of any show elements that move or other forces that 
may cause loads to change during the load in, event or load-out. This includes but is not limited 
to:  
 The locations and weights of all rigging attachment points; 
 The application of loads to event structures including static and dynamic (moving) 
loading; 
 The effects of weather related loading (e.g., snow or wind); and  
 The effects of any other loading that is applied to the structures (e.g., additional lighting, 
scenery, scrims, soft goods, score boards); 
 Design and specification of detailed lateral system requirements. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 186 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
182 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
18.1.2.3 Production Supervisor, Manager, Technical Director, or Operations Supervisor (titles 
vary). This role is generally responsible for the following: 
 Overseeing the installation, operation and dismantle of production elements; 
 Integration of production elements and the coordination of production vendors and 
suppliers; 
 Communications with the various vendors and suppliers relative to the production; 
 Representing the production or the event organizer as described above in production 
related matters;  
 The management of information and documents that apply to the events rigging in 
conjunction with the events production rigger and/or the engineer described above; 
 Serving as the event organizers representative and liaison between the Producer, the 
Venue, the Subcontractors and the local authorities with regard to the production of the 
event; 
 Obtaining the applicable and approved documents from the engineer and storing those 
documents in a readily available safe location e.g. the event binder for the duration of the 
event. These documents should be in hand and verified prior to the commencement of 
rigging work; 
 At the conclusion of the rigging installation, obtaining signed statements from the 
responsible rigging/installer that the rigging system is safe for use. 
 
18.1.2.3.1 Please note that on occasion the head rigger or rigging vendor may assume some or all 
of these duties. This does not relieve the organizer of their obligation to verify that the above 
work has been completed. 
 
18.1.2.4 Production Rigger. The person in this role is generally responsible for the following: 
 Participating in the development of the rigging risk assessment, fall protection plan, 
rigging rescue plan and the overall event emergency response plan; 
 Reviewing the event safety policy with all rigging workers immediately prior to starting 
work; 
 The integrity of the event related rigging system and its operation; 
 Working with and guiding the subcontractors, rigging team supervisors and rigging 
service suppliers during the installation, operation and removal of the event related 
equipment.  
 Usage, maintenance and inventory of event related rigging equipment; 
 Monitoring the event related rigging installation to ensure the rigging plan is properly 
executed per the approved documents and drawings; 
 Maintaining applicable documentation including relevant engineering information and an 
accurate as-built rigging plan; 
 Verification of the events actual rigging loads, particularly dynamic loads; Inspection of 
event related production elements for integrity before the equipment is raised and again 
once those elements have been locked off and secured; 
 Oversight of the operation and working crew for all show elements that move, including 
any automation;  
 Monitoring all rigging equipment operators for competence and reporting incompetent 
workers for removal from the rigging crew; 
\n\n=== PAGE 187 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
183 
 
 Contacting the design engineer to review any variations and/or discrepancies from the 
approved engineering documents and drawings; and 
 Receiving written approval from the design engineer for any variations and/or 
discrepancies from the approved engineering documents and drawings. 
 
18.1.2.4.1 A production rigger should meet the definition of a qualified person as defined by 
OSHA, which is One who, by possession of a recognized degree, certificate, or professional 
standing, or who by extensive knowledge, training and experience, has successfully 
demonstrated his ability to solve or resolve problems relating to the subject matter, the work or 
the project (29 CFR 1926.32(m)). 
 
18.1.2.5 Riggers. Riggers install and operate the rigging components. Competency of the rigging 
staff is central to safety. Riggers should be familiar with the applicable regulations, industry 
standards and practices, have an understanding of the specifics of the venue and supporting 
structures, either temporary or permanent, and be trained in the proper use of personal protection 
equipment (PPE)(see Chapter 16, Personal Protective Equipment).   
 
18.1.2.5.1 Rigging teams consist of high riggers and ground riggers and may be supplied through 
a labor contractor or a subcontractor. High riggers install rigging points with the assistance of the 
ground riggers.  
 
18.1.2.5.2 All members of the rigging team(s) touch and inspect their respective elements of the 
rigging and should vigilantly look for questionable (i.e., worn or compromised) rigging 
equipment. They must know and use proper equipment handling procedures and rigging 
terminology. Describing the full responsibilities of a qualified entertainment rigger is beyond the 
scope of this document. 
 
18.1.2.5.3 At a minimum, a rigger should meet the definition of a competent person as defined 
by OSHA, which is One who is capable of identifying existing and predictable hazards in the 
surroundings or working conditions which are unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous to employees, 
and who has authorization to take prompt corrective measures to eliminate them (29 CFR 
1926.32(f)). 
 
18.1.2.5.4 In addition to the safe installation, operation and dismantling of the rigging 
equipment, all riggers are expected to observe and monitor the events environment for issues in 
support of the production rigger and his or her duties as described above in 18.1.2.4 and to report 
those issues to the production rigger.  
18.2 Safe Rigging Environment 
18.2.1 Everyone associated with the execution of an event is expected to work together to create 
a safe working environment. As this relates to rigging, factors to consider include: 
 
18.2.1.1 Chain of command. It is essential that a clear chain of command and control is 
established and understood by everyone on the job site prior to the start of work.  
 
\n\n=== PAGE 188 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
184 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
18.2.1.2 Area control. All event workers must be aware at all times of where rigging teams are 
working overhead and avoid the area directly below them. A ground rigger or another designated 
person should be tasked with the job of monitoring the zone under where rigging work is 
occurring and keeping all non-rigging crew personnel out of immediate harms way. Only 
competent ground riggers should be in the work zone directly below the high riggers, with all 
others outside the perimeter of that work zone. It is important that everyone is aware of the 
rigging work occurring in the area. Ground riggers should keep all persons in the vicinity 
informed of the rigging process, especially those persons near the work zone under the rigging 
teams above. If possible, warning signage or cone markers should be utilized to discourage 
persons from entering the work zone under where rigging is occurring overhead. 
 
18.2.1.3 PPE. All persons in the area below active overhead work should have personal 
protective equipment (PPE) suitable to the working environment, according to the event safety 
policy and the local authority (see Chapter 16, Personal Protection Equipment). 
 
18.2.1.4 Loud and clear communication. Due to ambient noise typically present during an 
installation, radios are often used by the rigging crew to communicate. However, due to the 
nature of rigging work, simple voice commands are often more efficient. Communication should 
be limited to clearly understood terms. 
 
18.2.1.5 Lifting or moving operations. When lifting, moving or lowering rigging equipment, 
always make a loud and clear announcement such as truss moving, grid moving or line set 
#24  backdrop coming in to inform all persons in the area of the intended action. Work, 
especially noisy operations, such as construction, gas operated blowers, audio checks and loud 
conversations must be suspended immediately before and during the lifting operation. This is a 
critical issue because the first sign of trouble will often be heard before being seen, such as a 
motor problem or a lift chain running from a chain bag. Prior to the move, all persons in the area 
should move to a safe position.  
 
18.2.1.5.1 Event workers should closely watch the lifting operation and be ready to call out the 
word STOP if they see a problem. This is the only acceptable term to use in an urgent situation 
when something may be wrong and the operation must temporarily halt. While preparing to 
make the lift, it is a good idea to reiterate to those workers monitoring the movement that the 
universally-recognized word to halt operations is STOP not WHOA, HO, HEADS UP 
or any other term.  
 
18.2.1.5.2 Only designated competent persons should observe and monitor the lifting operation. 
In doing so, they should pay close attention to all hoist locations, watching for uneven 
conditions, fouled rigging, stopped motors, or other problems. These persons must have a direct 
line-of-sight to the objects involved in the operation as well as, for flying objects, the paths the 
objects travel. One very serious and common problem is the occurrence of a hoist chain not 
feeding chain into the chain bag during a lift, causing the chain to run free and descend at an 
NEVER stand directly under a  
lifting or lowering operation! 
\n\n=== PAGE 189 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
185 
 
increasing rate of speed toward the flooran episode that inevitably ends with the tail of the 
chain freefalling to the floor, potentially causing serious injury to people or damage to equipment 
below.   
 
18.2.1.6 Fall protection. During pre-production, a personnel risk assessment must be conducted 
in the rigging planning stage. Rigging staff MUST BE TRAINED in proper safety practices prior 
to coming to the jobsite. On the job under stressful load-in conditions is not the best time or 
place to train a new rigging crew on any aspect of the job especially fall protection.  
 
18.2.1.6.1 All workers on the job site who meet the criteria for working at height (six feet or 
more over a lower level) during the course of providing their services must use the appropriate 
fall protection equipment as required by law, the event safety policy, the venues safety policy 
and accepted industry best practices. This includes workers involved with the operation or use of 
equipment such as articulated boom lifts, man lifts, scissor lifts or similar high reach equipment.  
 
18.2.1.6.2 OSHA, in its definition of unprotected sides and edges requires that, Each 
employee on a walking/working surface (horizontal and vertical surface) with an unprotected 
side or edge which is 6 feet (1.8 m) or more above a lower level shall be protected from falling 
by the use of guardrail systems, safety net systems, or personal fall arrest systems (29 CFR 
1926.501(b)(1)). 
 
18.2.1.6.3 The event organizer or their agent should contact the venue in advance to determine if 
specialized equipment is necessary to access the venues rigging or if any specific regulations 
exist for rigging in that venue. If there is a fall protection system installed in the venue, all 
riggers must be trained in its proper use prior to the commencement of work.  
18.3 Rigging Rescue  
18.3.1 Fall protection equipment does not prevent falls; it prevents the worker from falling to his 
or her death by arresting the fall. After an arrested fall, an injured or unconscious worker may 
hang in a safety harness for an extended period of time requiring rescue. Time is often critical 
during a rigging rescue operation. A worker hanging in a harness, especially an injured one, may 
experience orthostatic hypotension (abnormally low blood pressure that can lead to shock, a life-
threatening condition, due to being in a position that does not allow proper blood flow) or 
suspension trauma (injury from hanging or falling in a harness). Either of these conditions can be 
fatal.  
 
18.3.2 For all work that is performed at height a rescue plan must be created. This plan outlines 
the procedures to rescue a worker from an elevated location. The Rigging Rescue Plan must be 
understood by all pertinent parties, not just the rigging crew and communicated verbally during 
the preload-in safety meeting. This meeting typically includes venue representatives, production 
and stage management, touring representatives, local responders, event EMT services, security 
supervisors and labor supervisors. All workers performing work at heights must review and be 
knowledgeable of the rescue plan. Rescue plans must include methods of self-rescue when 
possible and safe, assisted recovery performed by trained personnel, and include the process of 
how and when to contact local emergency responders. There must be a designated rescue leader 
assigned the responsibility of implementing the rescue plan. In the event of a rescue operation, 
\n\n=== PAGE 197 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
193 
 
19.2 How the Law Applies 
19.2.1 It is the organizers responsibility to understand and implement the relevant local, state 
and national requirements as required by the authorities having jurisdiction. 
19.2.2 Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 
19.2.2.1 The extent to which the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Standards for 
Accessible Design (http://www.ada.gov/ 2010ADAstandards_index.htm) and accessible 
stadiums (http://www.ada.gov/stadium.pdf) may apply to event buildings, structures, equipment 
and devices is beyond the scope of this document and must be established by competent legal 
counsel. However, organizers and venue managers would be prudent to familiarize themselves 
with these requirements and be constantly mindful of their intent as they relate to event venues:  
to improve accessibility (to all aspects of the venue, including safety features) and enjoyment of 
those with disabilities and certain physical limitations who wish to attend. 
 
19.2.2.2 See Chapter 11, Facilities for People with Special Needs, for more information about 
the Americans with Disabilities Act and its applicability. 
19.3 Preliminaries 
19.3.1 Choosing the Location 
19.3.1.1 Many factors may influence the choice of location for temporary structures: 
 Is the site adequately drained? If the site is liable to flooding, this could cause either the 
load-bearing capacity of the ground to be reduced or wash away the ground under the 
supports. Take measures to control these effects. 
 Is the site flat or can it be made flat? Where there is a gradient or the ground is uneven, 
the structure needs to be capable of being modified to accommodate such variations. 
 Are there overhead power cables, and if so are they sufficiently clear of the upper part of 
the structure? Are there cranes, which may be employed in the assembly of temporary 
structures)? 
 Does the proximity of surrounding buildings, structures and vegetation create the possible 
spread of fire? 
 Are there prevailing winds or weather patterns that could affect the performance of the 
stage? The stage should be located to lessen the hazards of potential weather events. 
 Do you need to reduce or mitigate sound levels due to current neighborhood zoning? 
 Is there enough space for trucks, power generators and other equipment or will it cause a 
hazard? 
 Will the placement of lighting, sound and video equipment affect the safety? 
 What about evacuation procedures? Is there enough exit space? 
 Does the safety policy address it? 
 Is it in the engineering drawings? 
 
19.3.1.2 Obtain information from appropriate authorities or those with jurisdiction about the 
load-bearing capacity of the ground or stage floor. For outdoor events, ensure that the ground 
load-bearing capacity is capable of supporting the imposed loadings in all weather conditions. 
\n\n=== PAGE 206 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
202 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
19.11.4.2 Calculations: Allowable load documentation from licensed engineer indicating limits 
of the structure for: 
 
(a) Allowable equipment loads for show equipment (live load) for audio, lighting, 
scenery, video, etc., including permissible connection locations to structure; 
(b) Environmental limits including seismic and wind loading; 
(c) Ground conditions, capacities and foundation requirements; 
(d) Lateral stability requirements including anchorage details 
i. Differences between ground anchorage and ballast requirements must be clearly 
identified; 
(e) Load assumptions and considerations; 
(f) Operations Management Plan minimum requirements. 
 
19.11.4.3 Event Specific Compliance: Summary of the specific event loads (rigging plot, audio 
loads, etc.) and conditions that demonstrates the structure is sufficient for the intended purpose 
including: 
(a) Suitability of the site: 
i. Access for equipment and erection of structure; 
ii. Ground conditions; 
iii. Underground interferences (sprinkler systems, utilities, etc.); 
iv. Condition of elevation changes affecting structure (changes in ground height); 
(b) Overall site layout diagram showing: 
i. Location of structure; 
ii. Access locations; 
iii. Audience location(s). 
(c) Rigging plot overlaid on structure indicating compatibility; 
(d) Copy of permit(s) from the local jurisdiction event is to be held if applicable; 
(e) Inspection records of the structure and its components should be available upon 
request as needed; 
(f) Upon the completion of the structure erection, a certificate of completion should be 
provided by the installer. 
 
19.11.4.4 Operations Management Plan: An action plan indicating the various stages of 
operating conditions of the structure and the actions to be taken when those conditions are met. 
This is a plan describing the various conditions structures may encounter (e.g., regular and 
emergency maintenance, overloading, wind, rain, snow, ice, hail, lightning, flood, fire, etc.) and 
the actions to be taken should the structures be confronted with any of the described conditions. 
 
(a) Wind: 
i. Monitoring 
1. A specific qualified individual responsible for monitoring on site conditions 
and forecasted conditions must be identified before the event; 
2. Wind must always be monitored on site with an anemometer or other 
appropriate device; and, 
3. A reliable means of communication must be established with appropriate 
weather resources to monitor impending conditions. 
\n\n=== PAGE 209 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
205 
 
20. Pyrotechnics, Fireworks and 
Flame Effects 
20.0.1 The application of this subject matter is so potentially hazardous and highly regulated that 
the first and most important recommendation must be that anyone interested in providing 
pyrotechnics, fireworks, and/or flame effects at an event should engage a qualified vendor 
 Who has been fully vetted and found to be qualified, competent, licensed, safe, and 
reputable; 
 Who has provided references with which you have followed up, including vetting them 
through the state regulatory authority on fireworks (often the State Fire Marshal); 
 With relevant and well documented experience in exactly what is being asked of them; 
 Who has an excellent and well documented safety record related to pyrotechnics, 
fireworks, and/or flame effects; 
 Who can show documented training in contemporary methods and procedures related to 
pyrotechnics, fireworks, and/or flame effects; 
 Who possesses commercial general liability insurance with an appropriate endorsement 
for pyrotechnics (a limit of no less than $5 million is recommended) and workers 
compensation insurance covering all the vendors employees; 
 Who employs for the event only individuals licensed by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction (AHJ) who are 21 years of age or older; 
 Who provides rsums for every employee working on the event; and 
 Who is, ideally, known to the local fire official. 
 
20.0.2 Nothing, including this document, can replace the use of a reputable, qualified, licensed 
and competent pyrotechnics vendor. In fact, compliance with the technical and regulatory 
requirements related to pyrotechnics, fireworks, and/or flame effects at an event are so important 
to the safety of guests and staff at the event that only those with significant experience in their 
safe use should be dealing with them at all. This chapter is not meant to replace the identification 
and use of a qualified and competent vendor of pyrotechnics, fireworks, and/or flame effects at 
an event. However, this chapter will provide some background, general guidance, checklists, and 
resources that event organizers might find helpful when familiarizing themselves with the laws, 
regulations, and safety issues related to the use of pyrotechnics. It remains the responsibility of 
the event organizer to identify and engage an acceptable vendor. 
 
20.0.3 Chapter outline. This chapter is organized into five general parts: Definitions, Getting 
Started, Guidelines, Checklists, and Safety Resources. (The section number is indicated in 
parentheses.) 
 The Definitions section (20.1) describes the relevant terms used in this chapter, as well 
as citing some of the standards and rules that apply to the subject matter. 
\n\n=== PAGE 215 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
211 
 
 Schematic and detailed drawing of all special effects including electronic controls, 
valves, hoses, piping, fuel control mechanisms, accumulators, pressure gauges and 
proximity devices.  
 
20.3.3 When a flame effect will be involved, an operator must submit detailed documentation of 
his or her qualifications and experience, including the same for all operators, crew members, 
designers, and fabricators. These documents must include at least the following: 
 Name, address, and contact information of company. 
 Commercial general liability insurance with an appropriate endorsement for pyrotechnics 
(a limit of no less than $5 million is recommended) and workers compensation insurance 
covering all the vendors employees. Confirm that the coverage meets all the 
requirements of the AHJ for permitting and operations. 
 History of past shows so they can be thoroughly vetted. Make sure to identify the types of 
flame effects and systems used and the description of any incidents involving the use of 
flame special effects, especially where someone was injured or killed. 
 Licenses or certifications held in any state and/or country. 
 Collect and review a rsum for each person working for the contracted company that 
will work at your show or manage any portion thereof. Make sure the rsum includes all 
relevant experience and that all flame effect operators are at least 21 years of age. 
 Event management should review all information and documentation prior to its 
submission to the AHJ to meet permitting requirements. A copy of all approved permits 
must be maintained on site and made available to inspectors and regulators upon request. 
 
20.3.4 Performers, support personnel and non-participants exposed to the associated hazards of 
the flame special effects must be informed by the operator of the hazards and trained in 
emergency procedures. 
 Also identify the effect on animal areas and procedures for proper animal handling.  
 
20.3.5 Identify the personal protective equipment (PPE) to be used that is applicable to the 
hazards associated with the exposure to, and handling and use of, the flame effects utilized for 
the performance. 
 
20.3.6 All flammable and combustible liquids not connected for use must be stored in holding 
areas designed and maintained in accordance with applicable NFPA and local fire codes. They 
must also be properly labeled and stored in areas that are locked and secured. 
 
20.3.7 Documentation must be developed and maintained that shows that all affected 
combustible set, scenery and rigging materials, are treated with flame retardant materials. All 
flame special effects devices must also be properly secured to noncombustible materials. 
 
20.3.8 The flame special effects operator must inspect and document all areas of the site where 
flame special effects and pyrotechnics effects and devices are ignited before start-up and after 
shut-down. 
 
20.3.9 Written documentation should be maintained confirming that all flame special effects 
operators and crew members have successfully passed a drug test in accordance with an accepted 
\n\n=== PAGE 216 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
212 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
drug and alcohol policy. Although this is not currently required in all jurisdictions, it is a 
recommended best practice. 
 
20.3.10 All effects must have an emergency stop system to cause shut-down of the flame effects 
system.  This system must bring the device to a zero energy state causing all ignition sources to 
be unpowered and detached from their respective fuel sources. This includes: 
 Removal of power to all gas valves; 
 Removal of power to ignition devices; and 
 Operator action to acknowledge the cause and reset the system. 
 
20.3.11 A number of detailed technical system requirements are included in the standards related 
to the use of flame effects. Some examples are provided here but operators must refer to the 
NFPA standards and local AHJ for specific guidance: 
 All control mechanisms including valves, sensors, and switches must be designed and 
located to prevent tampering and accidental firing or release of fuel. 
 Each special effect must be provided a means of primary lock-out that interrupts the 
supply of fuel and control energy. 
 All burners must be provided with a listed automatic ignition device or flame safeguard 
that supervises ignition. 
 Flame failure response time should not exceed 4 seconds. 
 Ignition of the device or pilot must be proven prior to attempting to light a burner. 
 Gaseous flame effects must be capable of maintaining system pressure at 1-1/2 times the 
maximum operating pressure for a period of 24 hours. 
 With the complete system in place, all piping, accumulator valves, hoses, etc. must pass a 
pressure test of 1-1/2 times design pressure with an inert gas. 
 The system pressure must be recorded with atmospheric temperature and pressure and 
there must be no observable pressure loss within 24 hours. 
 
20.3.12 For temporary installations, at least two pressurized water 2-A fire extinguishers and two 
10-BC fire extinguishers must be provided in the venue in addition to those required by NFPA 
10, Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers. 
20.4 Guidelines  Flame Performer 
20.4.1 When a flame performer will be used, a design plan must be incorporated into the event 
operations plan and submitted in writing. A flame performance design plan includes at least the 
following: 
 
20.4.1.1 Certain weather conditions can result in the termination of the flame performance, so 
weather must be monitored (see Chapter 7, Weather Preparedness, for more information on 
monitoring weather). In the plan, define the weather conditions that may require specific actions, 
up to and including termination of the performance. For an outdoor event, include a weather 
forecast report in the design plan. For an indoor performance, identify ventilation options and 
plan for HVAC/detector adjustment and fire-watch procedures, as needed. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 218 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
214 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 Emergency procedures including a fire hazards evaluation for permanent installations to 
determine level of fire protection required and in place. 
o In all cases, at least two pressurized water 2-A extinguishers and two 10-BC 
extinguishers must be provided, in addition to those required by NFPA 10, 
Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers, for the venue. The extinguishers must 
be placed so that at least one each is located on opposing sides of the performance 
where flame effects are used. 
 Normal and emergency shut-down procedures for the effects. 
 Maintenance schedules and procedures for all equipment involved. 
 A copy of all applicable documentation, including records of any inspections and 
operational tests, should be included in the written materials for verification of 
operability of protective control systems such as fire protection systems. 
 Schematic and detailed drawing of all flame props and special effects. 
 
20.4.3 When a flame performer is involved, an operator must submit detailed documentation of 
his or her qualifications and experience, including the same for all operators, crew members, 
designers, and fabricators. These documents must include at least the following: 
 Name, address, and contact information of company. 
 Commercial general liability insurance with an appropriate endorsement for pyrotechnics 
(a limit of no less than $5 million is recommended) and workers compensation insurance 
covering all the vendors employees. Confirm that the coverage meets all the 
requirements of the AHJ for permitting and operations. 
 History of past shows so they can be thoroughly vetted. Make sure to identify the types of 
flame effects and systems used and the description of any incidents involving the use of 
flame special effects, especially where someone was injured or killed. 
 Licenses or certifications held in any state and/or country. 
 Collect and review a rsum for each person working for the contracted company that 
will work at your show or manage any portion thereof. Make sure the rsum includes all 
relevant experience and that all flame operators are at least 21 years of age. 
 Event and venue management should review all information and documentation prior to 
its submission to the AHJ to meet permitting requirements. A copy of all approved 
permits must be maintained on site and made available to inspectors and regulators upon 
request. 
 If a permit is not required, confirm this fact, document it, and maintain a record of it. 
 
20.4.4 Performers, support personnel and non-participants exposed to the associated hazards of 
the flame special effects must be informed by the operator of the hazards and trained in 
emergency procedures. 
 Identify the effect on animal areas as well as procedures for proper animal handling. 
 
20.4.5 Identify the personal protective equipment (PPE) to be used that is applicable to the 
hazards associated with the exposure to, and handling and use of, the flame effects utilized for 
the performance. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 219 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
215 
 
20.4.6 All flammable and combustible liquids not vital to and approved for the performance must 
be stored in holding areas designed and maintained in accordance with applicable NFPA and 
local fire codes. They must also be properly labeled and stored in areas that are locked and 
secured. 
 
20.4.7 Documentation must be maintained confirming that all affected combustible set, scenery 
and rigging materials, have been treated with flame retardant materials.  
 
20.4.8 The flame effect operator must inspect and document all areas of the site where flame 
props and effect devices will be ignited before start-up and after shut-down. 
 
20.4.9 Written documentation should be maintained confirming that all flame special effects 
operators, crew members and flame performers have successfully passed a drug test in 
accordance with an acceptable drug and alcohol policy. Although this is not currently required in 
all jurisdictions, it is a recommended best practice. 
 
20.4.10 For flame effects requiring pressurized expulsion of fuels for effect, see the requirements 
under Guidelines - Flame Effect (section 20.3) above. 
20.5 Guidelines  Pyrotechnics 
20.5.1When pyrotechnics will be used, a design plan must be incorporated into the event 
operations plan and submitted in writing. A pyrotechnics design plan includes at least the 
following: 
 
20.5.1.1 Certain weather conditions can result in modification of the execution of the 
performance and termination of the pyrotechnic effects, so weather must be monitored (see 
Chapter 7, Weather Preparedness, for more information on monitoring weather). In the plan, 
define the weather conditions that may require specific modifications to the execution of the 
performance, up to and including termination. For an outdoor event, include a weather forecast 
report in the design plan. For an indoor performance, identify ventilation options and plan for 
HVAC/detector adjustment and fire-watch procedures, as needed. 
 
20.5.1.2 A site plan (map of the site drawn to scale) must be developed that indicates at least the 
following: 
 Location of all pyrotechnic materials including classification and trajectory; 
 Identify the location for the preparation of any product involved with the pyrotechnic 
display; 
 Operator control areas; 
 Restricted zones; 
 Area(s) affected by pyrotechnic materialsidentify materials for flame retardant 
treatment and type; 
 Proximity sensors, as applicable, or means of monitoring and securing discharge and 
fallout locations; 
 Audience proximity to performance and preparation areas; 
 Performer and cast member proximity to each effect; 
\n\n=== PAGE 221 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
217 
 
o Pyrotechnic materials must only be fired from equipment specifically constructed 
for the purpose of firing pyrotechnic materials, and mounted in a secure manner to 
maintain their proper positions and orientations when fired according to the 
submitted plan; 
o Mortars in racks must be of sufficient design to prevent repositioning by a shell 
exploding in a mortar, which causes the mortar to burst; 
o Where there is doubt concerning the strength of racks holding chain-fused 
mortars, the separation distances from those racks to spectators must be twice that 
required for the size of shell used. In addition, a screen barrier must be utilized 
that is of sufficient strength for containment. In this situation, a schematic on the 
rack configuration and containment must be provided for approval prior to use; 
o Base side supports for rack formations must extend at least 3/4 the distance from 
the height of the tallest mortar, with a minimum of three securing points for each 
support to the rack frame; 
o Account for recoil forces generated from pyrotechnic ignition; and 
o Where a pyrotechnic special effect is placed near on or in contact with a 
performers body, a means of shielding or containment adequate to prevent any 
injury to the performer must be provided. 
 
20.5.3 When pyrotechnics are involved, an operator must submit detailed documentation of his 
or her qualifications and experience, including the same for all operators, crew members, 
designers, and fabricators. These documents must include at least the following: 
 Name, address, and contact information of company; 
 Commercial general liability insurance with an appropriate endorsement for pyrotechnics 
(a limit of no less than $5 million is recommended) and workers compensation insurance 
covering all the vendors employees. Confirm that the coverage meets all the 
requirements of the AHJ for permitting and operations; 
 History of past shows so they can be thoroughly vetted. Make sure to identify the type of 
materials, classification and performance size as well as a description of any incidents 
involving the use of pyrotechnics, especially where someone was injured or killed; 
 Licenses or certifications held in any state and/or country; 
 Collect and review a rsum for each person working for the contracted company that 
will work at your show or manage any portion thereof. Make sure the rsum includes all 
relevant experience and that all pyrotechnic operators are at least 21 years of age; and 
 Event and venue management should review all information and documentation prior to 
its submission to the AHJ to meet permitting requirements. A copy of all approved 
permits must be maintained on site and made available to inspectors and regulators upon 
request. 
 
20.5.4 Performers, support personnel and non-participants exposed to the associated hazards of 
the flame special effects must be informed by the operator of the hazards and trained in 
emergency procedures. 
 Identify the effect on animal areas as well as procedures for proper animal handling. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 222 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
218 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
20.5.5 Identify the personal protective equipment (PPE) to be used that is applicable to the 
hazards associated with the exposure to, and handling and use of, the pyrotechnic materials used 
in the performance. 
 
20.5.6 For multiple performances, all pyrotechnic materials for the days scheduled 
performances must be stored in holding areas designed and maintained in accordance with 
applicable NFPA and local fire codes. They must also be properly labeled and stored in areas 
that are locked and secured. 
 
20.5.7 Documentation must be maintained confirming that all affected combustible set, scenery 
and rigging materials, have been treated with flame retardant materials. All pyrotechnic materials 
must be properly secured to noncombustible materials. 
 All materials worn by performers in the fallout area during use of pyrotechnic effects 
must be inherently flame-retardant or have been treated to be flame-retardant. 
 
20.5.8 Pyrotechnic operator must inspect and document all areas of the site where pyrotechnics 
effects are ignited before start-up and after shut-down. 
 
20.5.9 Written documentation should be maintained confirming that all pyrotechnic operators 
and crew members have successfully passed a drug test in accordance with an accepted drug and 
alcohol policy. Although this is not currently required in all jurisdictions, it is a recommended 
best practice. 
 
20.5.10 All pyrotechnic operators and approved spotters must have a clear view of the effects, 
and all spotters must be in communications with the operators to verify proper clearances and 
safe operations of the effect performance. 
 
20.5.11 All firing control systems, mechanisms and switches should be designed and located to 
prevent tampering and accidental firing of pyrotechnic materials. 
 
20.5.12 All firing control systems must have an emergency stop system to cause shut-down of 
the pyrotechnic effects system.  This system must bring the device to a zero energy state causing 
all ignition sources to be unpowered. 
 Control firing system should have capability to omit firing of identified pyrotechnic 
materials within the operation of the performance sequence. 
 
20.5.13 Each control system for ignition of pyrotechnic material must be provided with a means 
of primary lock-out that interrupts the supply of control energy. 
20.6 Checklist  Gas Flame 
20.6.1 When using gas flame effects, ensure that the following tasks are completed: 
 
20.6.1.1 Required permitting by the AHJ has been confirmed and documented. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 232 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
228 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 Obtain U.S. Coast Guard approval for displays fired from harbors or navigable 
waterways. 
 Obtain Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) approval if close to an airport or heliport. 
 Ensure pilots are warned through issuance of a Notice to Airmen (NOTAM). 
 Submit required applications to the State and/or local Authority Having Jurisdiction 
(AHJ) and obtain necessary approval, licenses and permits. Minimum items to address 
include: 
o Qualified operator in charge 
o Properly trained assistants 
o Site layout with proper separation distances 
o Event description 
o Firing procedures 
o Termination procedures 
o Emergency procedures 
 Arrange for inspections required by State/local AHJ or Federal authorities. 
 Obtain approval from appropriate authorities to close roads or restrict access. 
 Arrange for fire service and EMS to be available for the display. 
 Obtain the required or appropriate insurance. 
 
20.10.1.2 Pre -Display Site Checklist. 
 Establish site security prior to arrival of pyrotechnic materials. 
 Protect all fireworks, pyrotechnic materials, and launching equipment from inclement 
weather and keep them dry at all times. 
 Prohibit smoking material, matches, lighters or open flames within 50 feet (15.24 m) of 
fireworks or pyrotechnic material. 
 Only necessary personnel required to perform the display set up and show must be 
allowed at the display site. 
 Prohibit persons in the display site who are under the influence of alcohol, narcotics, or 
medication that could adversely affect judgment, mobility, or stability. 
 No cell phones or radio frequency (RF) generating devices are permitted within the 
immediate discharge area while electrically ignited fireworks or pyrotechnic devices are 
prepared, loaded, or set up. 
 Wear all personal protective equipment appropriate for setup duties. 
 Verify that all mortars and racks are made of approved materials, and are of sufficient 
strength, length and durability to allow shells to be propelled to safe deflagration heights. 
 Make sure all mortars, mortar racks, bundles, pre-loaded box items, cakes, candles, and 
ground displays have been thoroughly inspected and deemed inherently stable. 
 Avoid placing any portion of your body over mortars during loading, wiring, or igniting, 
and immediately after the display has been fired. 
 Use safe handling and loading procedures for all pyrotechnic devices. 
 Pre-load larger shells as required. 
 Check proper fit of shells in mortars. 
 Designate spotter(s). 
 
20.10.1.3 Display Checklist. 
\n\n=== PAGE 233 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
229 
 
 Verify fire service and emergency medical service (EMS) units are available and ready to 
respond. 
 Establish good communications between crew, event sponsor, AHJ, and fire service/EMS 
units. 
 Maintain crowd control, utilizing monitors and/or barriers. 
 Use all required personal protective equipment especially protection for head, eye, 
hearing, and foot. 
 Wear long-sleeved and long-legged clothing made of cotton, wool or similar flame 
resistant cloth. 
 Avoid placing any portion of your body over mortars when manually igniting them. 
 Monitor weather and crowd conditions to maintain safety. 
 Comply with directions given by the AHJ, spotter(s), or fire/EMS units 
 Use only flashlights or other nonincendive (circuits which may spark under normal 
operating conditions, but which may not release enough energy to cause ignition) lighting 
in firing and ready box areas (A ready box is a storage container for aerial devices for 
use during set-up and display). 
 
20.10.1.4 Post - Display Checklist. 
 Wear personal protective equipment appropriate for cleanup duties. 
 Disable any electric firing switches and disconnect all electric cables. 
 After at least 15 minutes, conduct search of the display and fallout areas. 
 Follow proper marking and warning procedures for unexploded shells. 
 Ensure that all unused live product and duds are accounted for, properly handled, 
repackaged and secured according to Federal, State and local regulations. 
 Conduct a second site search at first light. 
20.11 Checklist  Outdoor Exhibition of Fireworks (example) 
20.11.1 To assist with compliance with their fireworks laws and regulations, one state (Ohio) 
provides a checklist of questions that, when answered in the affirmative, help confirm 
compliance by both the fire official and the exhibitor with the relevant requirements of NFPA 
1123, Code for Fireworks Display, NFPA 1126, Standard for the Use of Pyrotechnics Before a 
Proximate Audience, and State fireworks laws and regulations. The full form can be found online 
as part of the document at: www.com.ohio.gov/documents/2013fireworksredbook.pdf.  This 
same checklist also includes additional requirements (see below) that help focus the exhibitor 
on the essential elements of a safe event. Although the specific requirements for fireworks 
displays vary by state and local jurisdiction, this question checklist approach has been successful 
in facilitating communications between the invested parties and effectively documenting 
compliance with the requirements. This checklist of questions is intended to, first, have each 
question answered and initialed by the fireworks exhibitor, then verified and initialed by the fire 
official (AHJ). This is only an example. Please verify all specific requirements with the AHJ.  
 Was insurance bond of $1,000,000 or more verified? 
 Was product purchase verified to be from a licensed Ohio Wholesaler, Ohio 
Manufacturer, or Out-of-State Shipper with a shipping permit? 
\n\n=== PAGE 235 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
231 
 
 Check with the safety person and monitors for any signs of problems. 
 Allow registered assistants to enter the area and attend to extinguishing fires, smoldering 
embers, and debris in the firing area and fallout area. 
 Before entering the area, wait a minimum period of time, that the exhibitor deems 
necessary, to include letting the area cool with resulting inspection by fireworks crew. 
 Confer with the licensed exhibitor and, if mutually agreed, release fire crew and 
equipment from the scene. Do not release security or monitors. Maintain barricades for 
area until spectators have left. 
 Be sure all live product and duds are properly repackaged and secured into vehicle. 
Replace placards on vehicle. 
 Where fireworks are displayed at night, appropriate morning re-inspection of the site 
should be mutually agreed to. 
20.12 Checklist  Indoor Fireworks or Flame Effects Exhibition 
(example) 
20.12.1 To assist with compliance with their fireworks/flame effects laws and regulations, one 
state (Ohio) provides a checklist of questions that, when answered in the affirmative, help 
confirm compliance by both the fire official and the exhibitor with the relevant requirements of 
NFPA 160, Standard for the Use of Flame Effects Before an Audience, NFPA 1126, Standard for 
the Use of Pyrotechnics Before a Proximate Audience, and State fireworks and flame effect laws 
and regulations. The full form and checklist can be found online as part of the document at: 
www.com.ohio.gov/documents/2013fireworksredbook.pdf.  This same checklist also includes 
additional requirements (see 20.11.1.1, above) that help focus the exhibitor on the essential 
elements of a safe event. Although the specific requirements for fireworks displays vary by state 
and local jurisdiction, this question checklist approach has been successful in facilitating 
communications between the invested parties and effectively documenting compliance with the 
requirements. This checklist of questions is intended to, first, have each question answered and 
initialed by the fireworks exhibitor, then verified and initialed by the fire official (AHJ). This is 
only an example. Please verify all specific requirements with the AHJ. 
 Was insurance bond of $1,000,000 or more verified? 
 Was product purchase verified to be from a licensed Ohio Wholesaler, Ohio 
Manufacturer, or Out-of-State Shipper with a shipping permit? 
 Has exhibitor provided the number, names and ages of all assistants who will be present? 
 Was the site inspection conducted prior to issuing permit? 
 Has all planning and use of pyrotechnics and flame effects been coordinated with the 
venue owner, manager, or producer? 
 Was a written plan submitted to AHJ identifying firing and fallout area for each device, 
location of the audience, number & types of devices to be fired, and a description of each 
effect? 
 Have locations, distances, and details of the site plan been verified for accuracy? 
 Was certification provided that the set, scenery, rigging materials, and all materials worn 
by performers in the fallout area are inherently flame retardant or have been treated to be 
so? 
 Was a walk through and demonstration provided and approved? 
\n\n=== PAGE 236 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
232 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 Was a MSDS sheet provided for all pyrotechnic materials and fuels to be used in the 
effects? 
 Do all electrical firing systems have written instructions and/or a description of 
performance specification of flame effect created? 
 Does the flame effect system have a control system for emergency stop and complete 
shutdown? 
 Are all devices mounted so no fallout or flame damages property, causes personal injury, 
or death? 
 Is the fire protection system going to be interrupted during the performance? If yes, the 
owner must be notified and an approved fire watch present during that time. 
 Is all required portable firefighting equipment present and ready for use? 
 Are pyrotechnic product, binary systems, and mixing containers identified or marked by 
manufacturer? 
 Has type of communication been determined that will be used during the exhibition? 
 Are all pyrotechnic materials/devices and fuel stored in a secured, inaccessible, or 
supervised area? 
 Are all firing devices constructed and secured to remain in a fixed position during firing? 
 Is smoking or open flame prohibited where pyrotechnic materials or fuel is present? 
 Are all mortars and flash pots constructed so that they do not fragment or become 
distorted in shape when pyrotechnic material is fired? 
 Have measures been established to provide crowd management, security, fire protection, 
and emergency services? 
20.13 Safety Resources 
20.13.1 OSHA offers a number of relevant resources that might be useful to event organizers 
who will be dealing with pyrotechnics, fireworks, and/or flame effects. All of them can be 
accessed through their web site (www.osha.gov/SLTC/pyrotechnic/display/display.html) and 
they include the following: 
 General industry OSHA standards (29 CFR 1910); 
 Maritime activities, such as the launching aerial displays from barges, must comply with 
OSHA maritime standards (29 CFR 1918); 
 Construction activities, such as the building and removal of the display structures, must 
comply with OSHA construction standards (29 CFR 1926); 
 Fireworks safety display poster (in conjunction with American Pyrotechnics 
Association); 
 OSHA Compliance Policy for Manufacture, Storage, Sale, Handling, Use and Display of 
Pyrotechnics; 
 Standard interpretations, for example, 1910.119 does not apply to public displays of 
flame effects (1997, May 16);  
 Example enforcement actions; and 
 OSHA Safety Guidelines for Display Fireworks Sites (June 2004). 
 
20.13.2 All documents included in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (e.g., 29 CFR 1910) are 
available through the Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (e-CFR) at www.ecfr.gov. 
\n\n=== PAGE 239 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
235 
 
21. Special Effects and Lasers, 
Other than Pyrotechnics 
21.1 Special Effects 
21.1.1 Special effects include, but are not limited to the following: 
 Mechanical effects such as hydraulics, flying or suspended props, scenery or performers; 
 Mock fires and/or explosions; 
 Atmospheric effects such as wind, rain, fog, snow, and clouds; 
 Puppets and prosthetics; 
 Some wardrobe, hair and prosthetic make-up enhancements; 
 Computer generated imagery (CGI); 
 Other optical effects also known as photographic effects; and 
 A magic shows physical elements. 
 
21.1.2 A person seeking to hire a special effects company should educate him- or herself on the 
desired effect and the companies that specialize in providing that effect.  
 
21.1.3 Because some special effects can be expensive, producers and event organizers may 
experience sticker shock when they first see cost estimates for the desired special effects. 
Although price is an important consideration, producers should base their selection on a variety 
of factors, including the qualifications of the vendor and quality of materials used. Producers 
should avoid making product and service selections based solely on price or cost. 
 
21.1.4 Special effects are often customized for a particular purpose and created from scratch. 
There is often a significant amount of Research and Development (R&D) required to create the 
desired effect. 
 
21.1.5 Generally, producers should employ a buyer beware perspective when seeking a 
vendor. Be clear in the request for proposal and diligent when comparing quotations between 
potential vendors.  
 
21.1.6 As with all contracts, once a decision is made on the vendor and you are ready to move 
forward with a contract, take extra care to clearly define the scope of work, the indemnity and 
liability clauses and the remedies in the event of a breach of contract.  
21.2 Lasers 
21.2.1 The term LASER is an acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of 
Radiation.  
\n\n=== PAGE 241 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
237 
 
 The American National Standards Institute (ANSI)(www.ansi.org);  
 The Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) of the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)(www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/);  
 The U.S. Department of Labors Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA)(www.osha.gov);  
 The Council of Radiation Control Program Directors (CRCPD)(www.crcpd.org); and 
 Several state governments and the CRCPD have developed a model state standard for 
laser safety. 
 
21.2.3.2 As described below, both the laser presentation and the projector must comply with 
generally recognized laser safety requirements and laws. In the U.S., this means compliance with 
federal laws and having a valid variance (formal permission to deviate from a requirement of the 
regulations). Some states and localities may also have requirements. If lasers are used outdoors, 
the appropriate aviation authority may have additional requirements. 
 
21.2.3.2.1 For laser light shows and devices, a variance permits use of laser radiation levels that 
exceed the limits (Class IIIA) for demonstration laser products as specified in 21 CFR 
1040.11(c). A variance for laser light shows and devices is generally granted based on a 
determination that the product is required to perform a function which cannot be performed with 
equipment in compliance with the standard and that suitable means of radiation safety and 
protection will be provided. These suitable means are specified in the conditions of the variance 
and constitute, together with the balance of the laser product performance standard, an individual 
performance standard for a specific manufacturer of those specific laser products that may be 
certified by the manufacturer under the variance. Refer to 21 CFR 1010.4, Variances, for more 
information on laser variances. Review of the Compliance Guide for Laser Products (June 1992, 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, FDA, CDRH) may also 
be helpful and can be found on the FDA web site (www.fda.gov/). 
 
21.2.3.3 The laser show company is responsible for, and should handle, all reporting 
requirements. These requirements should not be assigned to the producer or venue.  
 
21.2.3.4 The following documents are required and event planners in the U.S. should review 
them prior to the event: 
 The laser company variance issued by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) / Center for 
Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH); 
 Show reports or notifications, if applicable; 
 Companys proof of applicable insurance coverage, e.g. General Liability and Workers 
Compensation; 
 Proof of other necessary coverage based on the event location or event; and 
 If the event is outdoors, an approval letter from the FAA may be required, especially 
when the lasers are not able to be terminated into a non-reflective structure.   
 
 
 
21.2.3.5 In the U.S., a given lasers beam is typically required to be 10 feet (3.048 m) above the 
floor surface where an audience will stand, and 8 feet (2.44 m) laterally from where the audience 
can reach sideways. In practical terms, this means the venue ceiling must be a minimum of 12 
feet (3.66 m) high, giving a foot (0.3048 m) or so for the beam effects. It also means that if a 
\n\n=== PAGE 263 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
259 
 
24.1.4 It is recommended that exhibit spaces, vendor tents, stalls and kiosks that have anchoring 
stakes should have stakes and guy lines marked to reduce potential for injuries. Please refer to 
OSHA requirements for protection of works from exposed rebar (rods, posts), which can be 
found online at http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/etools/construction/falls/protruding_rebars.html. 
24.2 Setting Up, Operation and Dismantling 
24.2 1 Most workers employed by people running merchandising stalls and stands are temporary. 
Define the responsibilities for health and safety and agree on methods of communication with the 
merchandisers. Give a copy of the site safety rules to the merchandisers when they arrive on site 
and ensure that they and any subcontractors are informed of the site safety rules. 
 
24.2.2 Checks should be made on any public and products liability insurance certificates. Agree 
on the operation time of the merchandising stands with the operator and explain procedures to be 
taken in the event of a major incident or contingency. Any gas or electrical equipment brought 
onto site by merchandisers should be accompanied by relevant inspection certificates and have 
undergone the recommended testing. Other equipment should be examined to ensure that the 
relevant fire-fighting equipment is available in case of fire. Some health jurisdictions have 
special certifications for food trucks; check with your local health department for details. 
 
24.2.3 In the case of permanent sites, information on health and safety policies within the 
premises will already be in place. Therefore, the procedures should be followed at all times by all 
concerned. 
 
24.2.4 Stewards working on behalf of the merchandisers should be involved in the event briefing 
and lines of communication. Discuss the use of radio communication to avoid conflicting 
frequencies. 
 
24.2.5 The storage of merchandising stock, particularly if flammable goods are for sale, should 
be discussed with the fire authority and local authority to ensure that the appropriate fire 
extinguishers are on hand on the stands or stalls. The control and movements of stock around the 
site should follow agreed procedures. 
24.3 Items of Merchandising 
24.3.1 The items for sale as merchandising should not breach any license requirements, trading 
standards, copyright, or trademark regulations. 
 
24.3.2 Ensure that information concerning items that could cause injury or discomfort (e.g., glo-
sticks) is given to the purchaser at the point of sale and the procedures for their correct use are 
prominently displayed. 
 
24.3.3 The practice of tattooing, body piercing and massage may require a special license or 
permit from a local authority. Check that the necessary licenses and permits have been or will be 
issued by the local authority before allowing tattooing or body piercing to take place. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 275 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
271 
 
are pre-arranged before the event begins to limit the amount of on-site organization between the 
press office and artists.  
27.2.8 TV Broadcasters  
27.2.8.1 TV requires the most amount of attention and the type of TV crews and workers can be 
broken down into three main areas: event filming crews, TV news crews, and production 
companies. 
 
27.2.8.1.1 Event Filming Units. A large event will generally be recorded by a dedicated 
production company or broadcaster for live or future broadcast. Plan these arrangements in 
advance as they require special facilities such as filming platforms, OB vehicles parked 
backstage, audio mixing trucks, video production trucks, front-of-house filming platforms, etc.  
These arrangements need to be considered in venue and site design. 
 
27.2.8.1.2 TV News Crews. TV news crews will consist of local news crews, cable and satellite 
crews. These crews are normally small (two to four people). They will require only a short 
amount of time on site and therefore can be serviced relatively quickly. They should be 
supervised wherever possible and escorted quickly and efficiently to key locations (production 
offices, services offices, front-of-house, etc.). Local TV crews may also request to go live 
during newscasts. This coverage is generally desirable since it helps promote the event. These 
crews typically use a van or SUV with a telescoping mast with a microwave transmitting antenna 
on top. These transmitters require line-of-site to specific reception sites somewhere in the area 
(usually on top of tall hills or tall buildings). For large events, it is advisable to designate a media 
vehicle parking area that has the appropriate site line for their equipment. Coordination with a 
local television stations engineering department can help determine the best location for this 
area. TV stations prefer a location that meets the necessary technical requirements and provides a 
vantage point that allows the venue or event to serve as a backdrop for their reporter. After the 
location is established, the media coordinator should conduct a media walk-through prior to the 
event in plenty of time to address any concerns. 
 
27.2.8.1.3 Production Companies. This is normally the largest part of the TV mix and is made up 
of television broadcast programs interested in covering the event. TV crews tend to need access 
to vehicles for equipment and storage, so consider space allocation close to the hospitality/VIP 
area as possible. Other non-essential vehicles can be allocated spaces in designated parking 
areas. 
27.2.9 Foreign Media  
27.2.9.1 Foreign media workers need to be clearly briefed in advance and given assistance to 
understand the safety requirements especially regarding the provision, compatibility and use of 
electrical equipment.  
27.2.10 Student Media  
27.2.10.1 Student media can be helpful to the event and useful for communicating with the 
audience at events attended by predominantly young people.  
\n\n=== PAGE 279 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
275 
 
28.4.3 See Chapter 12, Transportation Management, for more general details on this topic. 
28.5 Children 
28.5.1 People may become more easily lost in a large event. This may be particularly true for 
children.  Organizers of large events should consider ways to help reunite children with lost 
parents, and to accommodate the needs of children during the time until their parents return to 
them.   
28.6 Information and Welfare 
28.6.1 The provision of a comprehensive information and welfare service that can assimilate and 
coordinate information in an active way as the event progresses allows other agencies, such as 
emergency medical and police services, to undertake their specialist functions. Everything 
possible that an individual requires for the duration should be readily available on the site.  
28.7 TV and Media 
28.7.1 The presence of regional, national and international media may in itself influence the 
progress of an event. In particular, incorrect ticket availability broadcasts may cause problems. 
Ensure that channels of accurate information are available for coordinated release to the media. 
 
28.7.2 See Chapter 27, TV and Media, for more information on this topic. 
28.8 Venue and Site Design 
28.8.1 The site design for a multiday event must recognize the need for 24-hour access to 
facilities for both the audience and for servicing the facilities. 
 
28.8.2 See Chapter 8, Venue and Site Design, for more information on this topic. 
28.9 Fire Safety 
28.9.1 Discussion should take place, pre-event, on the areas of responsibility for fire safety 
teams. There needs to be a clear understanding of the circumstances under which the local fire 
department will respond and lines of communication must be established. There should be a 
policy and procedure in place for safely dealing with small arena fires. 
 
28.9.2 See Chapter 4, Fire Safety, for more information on this topic. 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 291 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
287 
 
31. Arena Events 
31.0.1 This chapter aims to highlight factors to consider when organizing an event in an arena-
type environment. This discussion addresses events held at purpose-built arenas specifically 
designed for hosting events as well as premises to which temporary structures are added in order 
to accommodate particular events. 
31.1 Planning and Management 
31.1.1 Arenas specifically built to host events may require a permit, which will be held by the 
arena operator. If you wish to stage your own event in an arena already holding a permit you will 
need to work directly with the arena operator. The most important planning aspect will be 
determining the responsibilities for health and safety between the respective parties and 
documenting the agreements. 
 
31.1.2 Arena operators will likely already have a written safety policy, risk assessment and major 
incident and contingency planning documents for their own workers and events they promote 
themselves. If you are renting an arena (or part of it) and/or obtaining a permit in your own name 
you will also need to work with the arena operator so that information about the existing safety 
management policies and procedures can be exchanged. 
 
31.1.3 Health and safety responsibilities need to be determined for the preparation of the risk 
assessment for every event. Agreements also need to be documented on the services supplied by 
the arena operator including labor sources and equipment. There may be a need to appoint a 
safety coordinator from one of the parties. 
 
31.1.4 Arena operators are likely to have prepared their own in-house safety procedures which 
need to be communicated to any external contractors brought on site. In multi-occupied premises 
it is important that agreement is reached and health and safety responsibilities assigned between 
the parties, in relation to major incident planning. Ensure that the planning for the event is 
coordinated with the planning of the premises as a whole. 
 
31.1.5 A system to ensure that health and safety information is communicated to other users of 
the building, especially if there is more than one event occurring at the same time, also needs to 
be agreed upon and documented.  
 
31.1.6 The breakdown of the event may have to take place very quickly if the arena has been 
booked for other events. Working to tight deadlines needs careful planning to avoid a fatigued 
workforce more prone to physical and mental errors, which can lead to injuries. 
 
31.1.7 All these matters should be discussed at the initial planning meetings with the arena 
operator.  
\n\n=== PAGE 295 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
291 
 
32. Conventions and Trade 
Shows 
32.0.1 This chapter is aimed toward the producer of events at which products or services are 
showcased and marketed to potential customers. The presentation of one of these types of events 
combines the capabilities of a number of separate entities. Among them are the producer, venue 
or facility, exhibitions general contractor, exhibitors, exhibitor appointed contractors, audio-
visual services, labor providers, contracted security services, official florists, transportation 
service providers, and many others. 
 
32.0.2 The ultimate goal is to bring an audience together with an assembly of vendors who will 
want to maximize their selling opportunities. In addition to the complex operations that will need 
to be coordinated, the event producer will need to ensure the consumers and the exhibitors will 
have a safe and efficient environment in which to conduct their business. 
 
32.0.3 Most trade shows and expositions boil down to a basic 10 feet x 10 feet (3.05 m x 3.05 m) 
or 8feet x 10 feet (2.4 m x 3.05 m) space which is sold to an exhibitor as a location at which they 
will interact and engage with consumers. The show producer will then do his or her best to 
attract a pre-qualified audience that wants to buy. The exposition can be as few as 10 or 12 of 
these basic units, or as much as 1,000,000 square feet (92,903 square meters) or more of exhibit 
space. The events attendance can range from hundreds to tens of thousands of people per day. 
While the scale of the show will necessitate the addition or elimination of elements in the event 
safety plan, the factors below are common to any exposition. 
32.1 Planning and Management 
32.1.1 Once a group of vendors and a target audience have been identified, the event producer 
must establish how big the event space should be. A significant factor is whether the event is 
open to the public or only to a restricted group, e.g., a sponsoring organization. Attendee 
information from the sponsoring organization can often help in determining the size of the event. 
 
32.1.2 To attract exhibitors, promotional literature is often produced. One of these pieces of 
literature is known as the Exhibitors Manual. In this manual a potential exhibitor is informed of 
how the event will be managed. The manual will include the dates and times for the load-in, the 
actual exhibit, the load-out, and, importantly, it will include the event safety policy for the 
exhibitor. The rental agreement between the exhibitor and the producera separate document 
from the exhibitors manualshould then require the exhibitor to comply with the safety policy 
described in the manual and posted on site.   
 
32.1.3 The event producer will need to select the various contractors who will be servicing the 
event. Of the choices, the choice of a general services contractor may be the most important. 
During the vendor and contractor selection process, an important concern is the safety record of 
\n\n=== PAGE 296 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
292 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
the contractor and the liability insurance they have in place. Consult your insurer to help 
determine the contractor coverage requirements and to verify that the correct coverage for the 
event is in place.  
 
32.1.4 As with any public event, ensure that any contractors or subcontractors hired for the event 
are competent in managing their own health and safety on site. Require written safety policies 
and practices from these contractors and you will find many already have such documents in 
place. 
 
32.1.5 A producer may require a liability insurance rider from contractors that covers the work 
performed by that contractor and their subcontractors.  
 
32.1.6 Once the contractors are chosen, it is a good idea to hold a coordination meeting to 
establish communications among all parties. The key person for each contractor should be 
identified and contact lists distributed. For this contact list it is important to identify and 
differentiate the contractors actual on-site operational personnelthe person(s) who should be 
contacted for on-site supportfrom the sales staff who have sold the services to the producer. 
 
32.1.7 As with any event, all people working within the event should have a clear understanding 
of the event plan, what they are required to do as part of that plan, when to do it, and how to 
interface and communicate with other staff. 
 
32.1.8 Most fixed facilities will have relationships in place with local public services. In some 
four-wall venue rental situations, you will need to make direct contact with the local authorities 
to provide them your event plan along with key contact information that can facilitate 
communications in the event of an incident. Regardless of who establishes and owns the 
relationship, it is important to obtain specific contact information for law enforcement, fire 
protection, emergency medical services and other potential emergency response organizations. 
This information can then be provided to key members of the event staff and posted in the show 
or event office. 
32.2 Floor Plans 
32.2.1 Once the size of the event is determined, the next major management task will be to 
contract a facility and develop a scaled floor plan for the exposition. Unlike many events, there is 
usually no central performance or stage area. The layout is broken into the unit spaces offered, 
e.g., 10 feet x 10 feet (3.05m x 3.05m). 
 
32.2.2 The Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) will usually require a review of the event site 
plans. In this review, the overall occupancy load and distribution and location of aisles and 
designated exits must meet local requirements and will be of primary concern. Clearly label your 
proposed occupant capacities and crowd densities on the plans for this review. For more 
information on capacities and crowd densities, see Chapter 8, Venue and Site Design. 
 
32.2.3 The AHJ may approve or modify your proposed plan or set the overall maximum capacity 
inside the event space. The maximum capacity is computed by the building official working with 
\n\n=== PAGE 297 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
293 
 
the fire official and takes into account the type(s) of seating and configuration, travel distance to 
and capacities of aisles and exits. These local officials may also set a maximum number of 
people who can occupy any closed or confined space within an exhibit. Once determined and 
approved, these maximum capacities must be communicated to all entities and staff involved in 
the restricted area, and all reasonable means should be used to help enforce these limits during 
the event. 
 
32.2.4 Often the exhibit services contractor will assist in developing the event plans.  
Consideration needs to be given not only to the entrance, movement and exit of staff and 
attendees, but also to the access to freight docks and the movement of material handling 
equipment necessary to move freight into and out of the exhibit space. The safe movement of 
what can be millions of pounds of freight needs to be a part of the plan. 
 
32.2.5 Many exhibitors develop exhibits that are two stories in height. Most AHJs require the 
approval of plans for two-story exhibits and many of those will require a plan that bears the 
stamp of a professional engineer. The producer should acquire these engineered drawings in 
advance and to present them at the pre-event planning meeting with the AHJ.   
 
32.2.6 For exhibits of two or more stories, the covered floors of the exhibit will likely require fire 
suppression equipment since overhead fire sprinklers will no longer reach those areas. The pre-
event AHJ planning meeting is the time to review all such situations including the requirements 
necessary to allow time for the staff to remedy those situations.  
 
32.2.7 Most AHJs will require a pre-opening inspection of the exhibit floor. All installations 
should be completed by this time and the floor should be show ready. This inspection is to 
ensure that the approved floor plans have been followed and that exhibitors have not exceeded 
the space restrictions that may compromise the approved capacity, emergency exits or access to 
fire suppression equipment. During the inspection, the inspector may require last minute 
modifications, so producers should have their event staff ready and available to make the 
necessary changes. 
32.3 Freight Operations 
32.3.1 The movement of freight into and out of the exhibit space is often handled by the exhibit 
general contractor. However, in some cases the freight contract will have been given to a 
separate contractor. In addition, there are often smaller exhibitors who will want to deliver their 
own exhibit to their space. The event producer will need to ensure the exhibit general contractor 
or any other contractor handling freight for the event has the proper insurance in place at the time 
of the event.  
 
32.3.1.1 When the expected number of trailer/truck traffic exceeds the number of available dock 
spaces at the venue, it is best to establish a truck marshaling area. This will prevent the 
overcrowding of the dock area with waiting trucks, which will in turn increase truck turnaround 
time at the docks. This marshaling area may be either adjacent to the venue or far off-site (less 
common). Time is often a critical issue so it is advisable for the dock master to have a plan and 
the tools on hand, such as communications and material handling equipment, and assistants to 
minimize the turnaround time between trucks at the docks.   
\n\n=== PAGE 300 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
296 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
Flame Propagation of Textiles and Films, is often the standard used to address this need, but 
asking the local fire official is usually the easiest way to determine the details of any necessary 
requirements. A document certifying the required fire resistance of any material should be kept 
on file in the event office and shared with the both the general contractor and any individual 
exhibitors. It will likely be requested to be viewed by an inspector. 
 
32.5.1.1 On-site (field) fire resistance tests can be performed for some textile materials, such as 
are described in NFPA 705, Recommended Practice for a Field Flame Test for Textiles and 
Films. But, in many jurisdictions this is not permitted. Make sure that both event management 
team and the individual exhibitors are prepared to present the proper documentation pertaining to 
fire resistance, if requested. 
 
32.5.1.2 Some materials claim to be inherently fire resistant, such as Velon, a plastic sheeting 
material. These materials can be verified as fire resistant by the manufacturer but insist on 
written documentation and maintain the documents so that an inspector can view them, if 
requested. Although most inspectors are familiar with these materials, documentation should still 
be kept on file just in case it is requested. 
 
32.5.2 Any electrical device used in an exhibit should bear an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) 
seal.  Many products have a CE seal or both a CE and a UL seal. The CE is often taken to be an 
abbreviation of the French words Conformit Europenne, which mean European 
Conformity.  A CE seal indicates compliance with European Union (EU) legislation of a 
product and is not a substitute for a UL seal. Electrical devices that can be plugged into an 
outlet should also be connected to a properly wired, grounded receptacle. 
 
32.5.3 Some exhibitors will need to make use of a heat source to show their product. For 
example, in a cooking show, the food would need to be heated. Local authorities typically prefer 
electricity to be used for the heat source, but this should be verified in the pre-event planning 
meeting.  
 
32.5.3.1 The use of propane as a heat source may be prohibited because it is heavier that air, can 
pool on the floor until it finds an ignition source, and cause a fire and/or explosion. Some local 
authorities will permit only gasses that are lighter than air, such as natural gas (NG, methane) or 
synthetic natural gas (SNG), and then in limited quantities. 
 
32.5.3.2 The use of deep frying equipment can splash hot oil and cause injury. When a deep fryer 
is used, a splash shield between the fryer and the public must be in place. 
 
32.5.4 Equipment which may throw sparks, splinters or flakes of metal, should be placed away 
from the area where attendees may be endangered by them. 
 
32.5.5 The storage of approved combustible materials in the exhibit should be limited to no more 
than a one-day supply. Loose paper, empty cardboard boxes and other material must be disposed 
of as the need occurs. The waste disposal contractor should make regular collections to remove 
these materials. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 302 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
298 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
condition, as it is often placed along the back wall (either a hard wall or pipe and drape wall) of a 
line of exhibits and may not be easily accessed if there is a problem. 
 
32.7.3 Some exhibits require electrical service which must be placed underneath the carpet or 
temporary flooring. This could provide the possibility of an electrical short, overheating situation 
or other malfunction, especially if improperly installed. The electrical contractor should do all 
such installations and be held responsible for any maintenance and repairs. 
 
32.7.4 When it is necessary to make use of a transformer to provide larger amounts of power to 
an exhibitor, the high voltage supply side to the transformer will need to be routed in an area 
where the wiring is not exposed to either public or vehicular traffic. 
 
32.7.5 When electrical or control cables, hoses etc. need to cross an aisle, a cable ramp or cover 
should be employed to mediate the trip hazard. The cable ramp or cover should also be a 
contrasting color to the surrounding floor surface to increase visibility to pedestrians and 
equipment operators. When covered by carpet, a contrasting colored tape can be applied to the 
carpet to show where the ramp is located. 
32.8 Overhead Signage 
32.8.1 Most large exhibitions will make use of overhead signage. At a minimum, it is necessary 
to provide directions to the attendees. Often exhibitors, advertisers or sponsors will also want to 
utilize the added exposure and visibility a sign provides.  
 
32.8.2 Materials for the signs must be fire resistant (see 32.5.1, above) and structurally sound. 
Any equipment used for attachment to the overhead structure of the facility must have sufficient 
load carrying capacity for the weight of the sign as determined by a qualified engineer. Usually 
the attachments are made by the general contractor. The staff performing the work must be 
qualified and competent to do so. 
 
32.8.2.1 Many facilities will have restrictions concerning the use of some types of equipment for 
overhead attachment. One of the most common is that the use of bailing wire or stovepipe 
wire is not permitted because this type of wire breaks too easily.  Obtaining a list of permissible 
hanging devices is essential. The general contractor must be required to comply with the policies 
regarding the attachment of any elements to the venues overhead structure. 
 
32.8.3 To access the overhead structure it is usually necessary to use a high-lift or scissor lift. 
The driver of that type of equipment must be certified in its use and should carry the license at all 
times while operating the equipment. Operators should always have their training completion 
certificates in their possession. Any lift traveling the exhibit floor must have a ground person 
accompanying the lift to ensure safe operation during use. In addition, operators and workers in 
lifts should employ appropriate PPE and fall protection devices for the equipment they are 
operating.  
 
32.8.4 Increasingly, exhibits are making use of rapid deployment materials and equipment such 
as chain hoist motors and trussing, which are commonly seen at concerts and other entertainment 
\n\n=== PAGE 306 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
302 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
33. Small Events 
33.0.1 This chapter contains advice for the small-event organizer. The important factor to 
consider is not whether an event can be defined as small or large but the proportionate level 
and extent of facilities and safety management systems required to ensure the health, safety and 
welfare of patrons, performers, and event staff. 
33.1 Planning and Management 
33.1.1 It is suggested that small-event organizers use the chapter headings in this publication as a 
framework or checklist for event planning. All event organizers must be clearly aware of their 
responsibilities for the audience and other participants at their event, including performers, 
merchandisers, etc. 
 
33.1.2 Although small events may have relatively few patrons, the magnitude of any individual 
health or safety issue is the same as with larger events, and requires the same attention to 
planning and event management. As always, the activity itself and the audience type will 
significantly influence the safety needs for any given event. It is just as important for a small-
event organizer to carry out a risk assessment for the event, to identify which hazards are of 
greatest significance and therefore which parts of this publication are most relevant.  
 
33.1.3 A risk assessment and safety policy need not be long or complicated, but should clearly 
demonstrate the approach taken to ensure the safety of all those involved in the event. Assistance 
in drawing up a risk assessment and safety policy can be found in Chapter 2, Planning and 
Management.  
 
33.1.4 The safety management responsibilities could be handled by the existing management 
team for the event if they can effectively put the actions outlined in the safety policy into 
practice, otherwise a separate team should be established. All workers and/or volunteers need to 
be aware of safety procedures. Ensure that any contractors or subcontractors hired to build the 
stages, erect tents, booths or stalls, are competent in managing their own health and safety on 
site. If feasible, ask for copies of the contractors safety policies, risk assessments for their work 
and safety method statements.  
33.2 Staffing 
33.2.1 Small events may operate with small budgets and rely on enthusiastic volunteers rather 
than paid employees or contracted service companies. The crucial aspect is good coordination by 
the event management team and close supervision, support and monitoring of volunteers. The 
organizing group can sometimes provide many services at small events such as catering and 
security, rather than buying them in from commercial companies.  
 
\n\n=== PAGE 307 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
303 
 
33.2.2 Management of staff, including paid staff, vendor workers and volunteers requires clear 
job functions and responsibilities to be identified. It is important for inexperienced staff to 
receive proper briefing and supervision. 
 
33.2.3 Everyone working or providing services at the event should be clear about what they are 
required to do, how to do it and when it needs to be done. This can be achieved by preparing a 
schedule when work is required to be carried out and by whom, and informing everyone 
involved.  
33.3 Levels of Provision of Site Services and Facilities 
33.3.1 While some of the recommended levels of provision in this publication may be reduced 
for small events, there are areas where a minimum provision will be required. For example, the 
number of toilets obviously cannot be below two. Realistically, the number of medical staff, 
security, etc., should never be less than two, to allow for contingencies. 
33.4 Local Authority Liaison 
33.4.1 Small-event organizers should consult with the relevant local authorities and emergency 
services representatives with responsibility for the event. These officers will be prepared to offer 
advice and assistance including whether any permits are required.  
 
33.4.2 Provide the local authorities with sufficient written information to enable officers to 
understand the nature of the event. This documentation will in any case already have been 
prepared as part of your event planning and should include: 
 A description of the event, including key event timing, e.g., load-in, show and load-out 
times, audience size, type of activities, etc.;  
 A site plan showing relevant features and the events relationship with any adjacent 
neighborhoods;  
 A list of key members of the organizing team and their responsibilities;  
 The risk management strategy, including a copy of the risk assessment, safety policy and 
site-safety rules. 
 
33.4.3 Further documentation should be available on site during the event, including: 
 The safety policies, risk assessments and safety method statements for any contractors or 
subcontractors hired to erect stages, tents, roofed structures, booths, stalls, etc.; 
 Risk assessments and safety documentation of any  activities associated with the event 
such as inflatable structures, trampolines, etc.; 
 Appropriate certificates for any work equipment brought onto site, such as electrical 
equipment, generators, lifting equipment; 
 Copies of flame certificates for treated materials. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 310 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
306 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
35. Amusements, Attractions and 
Promotional Displays 
35.0.1 Additional information on this topic can be found on the web site of the International 
Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions (IAAPA)( http://www.iaapa.org/). 
35.1 Safety Standards, Regulations, and Policies  
35.1.1 Standards on Amusement Rides and Devices are available through ASTM International 
and its F-24 Committee (http://www.astm.org/COMMITTEE/F24.htm). This ASTM Committee 
is composed of consumer advocates, government officials, amusement park operators, ride 
manufacturers and industry suppliers. The Committee helps to establish standards on design and 
manufacture, testing, operation, maintenance, inspection, quality assurance and more. These 
standards undergo periodic review and revision to keep up with new technologies, and have been 
adopted by many governmental jurisdictions. 
 
35.1.2 Amusement parks are subject to varying combinations of state and local governmental 
codes, requirements, and safety reviews by government inspectors and/or insurance risk 
managers.  
 
35.1.3 Safety inspections may be conducted by amusement park staff on a daily, weekly, 
monthly and yearly basis. They should follow detailed manufacturer guidelines for inspection 
and safety, and many parks use outside specialty companies to periodically re-inspect rides. 
ASTM International standards require fixed-site amusement industry operators and 
manufacturers report both incidents and ride-related defects, including notification of facilities 
when a ride develops a manufacturer-related safety issue. 
 
35.1.4 The United States government does not regulate amusement parks. As of this writing, 44 
states regulate amusement parks. The six who currently do not are Alabama, Mississippi, 
Nevada, South Dakota, Wyoming and Utah. 
 
35.1.5 Generally, amusement parks follow the manufacturers guidelines for inspection and 
safety and many parks contract third party companies to independently inspect their facilities. 
Amusement parks report incidents to state and local governments. 
 
35.1.6 The International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions (IAAPA; 
www.iaapa.org/) created a list of amusement ride safety tips for guest use.  
 Obey listed age, height, weight, and health restrictions. 
 Observe all posted ride safety rules. 
 Keep hands, arms, legs and feet inside the ride always. 
 Remain seated in the ride until it comes to a complete stop and you are instructed to exit. 
\n\n=== PAGE 311 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
307 
 
 Follow all verbal instructions given by ride operators or provided by recorded 
announcements. 
 Always use safety equipment provided and never attempt to wriggle free of or loosen 
restraints or other safety devices. 
 Parents with young children should make sure that their children can understand safe and 
appropriate ride behavior. 
 Never force anyone, especially children, to ride attractions they dont want to ride. 
 If you see any unsafe behavior or condition on a ride, report it to a supervisor or manager 
immediately. 
 
35.1.7 Guidance is already available about attractions, rides, amusement devices and stalls found 
at fairgrounds and amusement parks (see the ASTM International guidelines or the IAAPA 
website for more information on guidelines for Amusements). This chapter does not replace the 
need for an event organizer to obtain this guidance. The intention of this chapter is to highlight 
some areas for consideration when amusements, attractions and displays are incorporated in a 
music event rather than at a fairground or amusement park.  
35.2 Amusements and Attractions 
35.2.1 If you wish to include amusement activities at your event, it is important to obtain the 
required safety information about the activity from the operator. This is to ensure that the siting 
and operation of the amusement does not: 
 Compromise safety with the overall risk assessment for the event; 
 Block the emergency access routes; or  
 Cause audience congestion problems. 
 
35.2.2 Points to consider when incorporating any amusement as part of the overall entertainment 
include the following: 
 Obtain advice about the particular hazards associated with the amusement or attraction 
from the operator and ask them for copies of their own risk assessment and safety 
information. Incorporate the information into your overall risk assessment for the event. 
 Obtain advice from the relevant enforcement authority (state and/or local authority) about 
the particular amusement. Local and state authorities should have up-to-date information 
concerning hazards that have been reported about a particular amusement activity.  
 Investigate the operators competence by posing the following questions: Is the operator 
able to demonstrate compliance with legislation or codes of practice? Do they have 
current insurance? Does each amusement have a current certificate of examination from 
an inspection body? What experience have they had in operating the amusement? What 
safety information can they supply about the amusement? 
 Information concerned with the safe operation of the amusement should also be given to 
other contractors working at the event who may be affected. 
 Determine appropriate setting-up times, operating times and dismantling times. 
Amusements should be set up before the audience enters or approaches the event. Make 
sure that the amusement is not dismantled until all members of the audience have left or 
are at a safe distance. Vehicle movements are often prohibited during events and 
amusement operators need to be informed about this policy. 
\n\n=== PAGE 312 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
308 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 Ensure that suitable space has been allocated for the amusement. Space is one of the most 
important considerations for any amusement. This does not just include space on the 
ground but often space above. Obstacles such as large trees, overhead cables and power 
lines can cause major hazards. The sides and rear of the amusement may need barriers. 
 When planning the positioning of the amusement, consider emergency access routes as 
well as space for audience members who may queue to ride the amusement. Space may 
be needed for family, friends and others to comfortably watch the amusement. 
 Ensure that the operation is coordinated with the music event. Crowd management 
problems can arise if operators are still offering rides on the amusement after the music 
event has ended and if members of the audience try to have one last ride before leaving. 
On the other hand, it may be appropriate to continue the operation of the amusement to 
stagger people leaving the event. Whatever the decision, careful coordination of the 
activities must be planned and communicated to the operator and event personnel. 
 The availability of natural light may also be an important safety factor in the operation of 
some amusements, particularly where color-dependent safety features are used. 
35.3 Bungee Jumping 
35.3.1 Permits 
35.3.1.1 States typically require bungee jumping operators to obtain a permit or license before 
they can operate in the state. The application process for these permits differs from state to state. 
For example, Ohio Administrative Code Section 901:9-1-23 sets out the states permit 
application requirements for bungee jumping operations. The permit must include information 
such as a site operation manual; a site plan with detailed information about safety zones, fences, 
jump zones and equipment locations; and proof of insurance coverage. The state can also require 
an applicant to submit a registered engineers report confirming that the design and construction 
of the equipment to be used meets engineering standards acceptable to the department and 
confirming that all applicable local codes have been complied with. 
35.3.2 Prohibited Activities 
35.3.2.1 States also place specific limitations on how and where bungee jumping operations can 
operate. These laws commonly place restrictions on what kind of jumping is allowed, where 
operators can set up a jump site and what kind of equipment is or isn't allowed.  
For example, the state of South Carolina Code of Laws 52-19-30 sets out the limitations on 
bungee jumping in the state. These prohibitions include: bungee jumping can only be done from 
a fixed platform; jumpers cannot use an ankle harness; jumping cannot take place over water, 
sand or any other surface other than an air bag; and tandem or multiple jumping is not allowed. 
35.3.3 Insurance and Notification  
35.3.3.1 States also require that bungee jumping operators are properly insured. The amount and 
kind of insurance required differs, but no bungee jumping operation is allowed to be open unless 
proof of insurance is first obtained. Operators also have a duty to report injuries or risk losing 
their permits or licenses. For example, the state of West Virginia imposes both insurance and 
notification requirements on all bungee jumping operators in the state. West Virginia Code 21-
12-11 states that all operators must have an approved insurance policy at all times during 
operation. The policy must be no less than $300,000 per person and $1,000,000 in total for each 
\n\n=== PAGE 314 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
310 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
35.4.10 Make sure to protect children and others from electrical equipment, wiring, and tie-
downs that may be associated with the device. Make sure to route foot traffic away from the tie-
downs and anchors. 
 
35.4.11 Extra insurance coverage may be necessary if the device is rented.  
 
35.4.12 Adults and children should not be in bouncy devices together. Adults should only use 
bouncy devices made specifically for adult size and weight. 
 
35.4.13 Inspection should include: 
 Is the bouncy device securely anchored? All anchorage points should be used and, if 
situated on hard ground, tie-down straps should be affixed to solid points.  
 Are impact-absorbing mats positioned at the open side of the bouncy castle, extending a 
sufficient distance forward to ensure sufficient protection? (Mats may not be necessary 
on soft ground.) 
 Is there at least one person constantly supervising the children in and on the device? An 
attendant who is collecting money cannot also supervise the activity. 
 Does the bouncy device seem overcrowded? If children are constantly knocking into each 
other, the attendant may not be following the maximum load recommendations. 
 Are children of different ages/sizes mixed? If the demand is great the attendant should 
operate a rotation to avoid larger children crushing smaller ones. 
 Are children instructed to remove sharp articles of clothing like shoes, buckles and 
jewelry and is the rule enforced? 
 Is there evidence that the attendant is controlling the children? Horseplay should not be 
allowed, and children should not climb on the walls of the inflatable.  
 
35.4.14 For inflatable devices used as promotional displays, such as rooftop inflatables, dancing 
inflatables, helium balloons, hot air balloons, parade balloons and more, check the standards 
offered by the U.S.-based Inflatable Advertising Dealer Association (http://inflatableads.org/). 
35.5 Flight Simulators and Computer Games 
35.5.1 Motion simulators, 4D video presentations and Game Based Learning are popular and 
expanding rapidly into many events.  
 
35.5.2 Care should be taken choosing the environments and designated areas where these 
activities take place. A replica domain is often used instead of an actual domain, e.g., in paintball 
or laser tag a virtual forest may be constructed of padded obstacles to reduce injuries to 
participants. The goal of these attractions is to cause the participant to think, act, experience 
consequences and pursue goals as if they were real and to find the right course of action based on 
experimentationmaking choices and experiencing the consequences. 
 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 316 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
312 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
 Participant/user-required safety equipment e.g., helmets, pads; 
 Maintenance and sanitation of the environment e.g., spraying or wiping down frequently 
handled items with a disinfectant; 
 Signage posting policies regarding age, size and weight limitations, health warnings, 
pregnancy warnings, etc., and enforcing the policies; 
 Queue line management, ingress and egress. 
35.6 Mobile Amusement Rides and Attractions 
35.6.1 Mobile amusement rides and attractions or individual may be incorporated at outdoor 
events and some larger indoor events. Standards for amusement rides are set by the ASTM 
International, F-24 Committee on Amusement Rides and Devices. There is also a series of plant 
and machinery guidance notes that detail the safety requirements. 
35.7 Circuses 
35.7.1 General 
35.7.1.1 It is relatively unusual for a complete circus to be part of a music event. However, it is 
not unheard of to find circus performers demonstrating their talents (e.g., fire eating, stilt walking 
and juggling) in and around the venue or site itself. Make sure to brief performers on audience 
safety (e.g., emergency exits should always be kept clear) and advise them where and when to 
start their act.  
 
35.7.1.2 The enforcement responsibility for circuses usually falls to local authorities, except for a 
small number of circuses operating on certain properties (e.g., state fairs), which may be the 
responsibility of state agencies. 
 
35.7.1.3 Other state laws and regulations may also apply to circuses such as those required for 
the handling of animals, amusement rides and food service. 
35.7.2 Staff 
35.7.2.1 All performers should have appropriate permits and undergo training to perform in the 
circus.  
 
35.7.2.2 The troupe should have a licensed nurse on staff, and as many performers as possible 
should be trained in first aid.  
 
35.7.2.3 The circus should provide staff members with the protective clothing they need for their 
acts. This clothing and any other apparatus used during performances should be inspected before 
each show to make sure they have not been damaged. 
35.7.3 Insurance 
35.7.3.1 The circus company needs multiple types of insurance including medical for employees 
and liability for injuries to customers/the public. 
\n\n=== PAGE 318 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
314 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
35.7.6.6 Fire, when used in an act, should be used at a safe distance from spectators. Many states 
have specific minimum distances for this. 
35.7.7 Animal Acts 
35.7.7.1 Animal exhibitors are required to be licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
The Animal Welfare Act regulates the use of most circus animals and states that there must be 
sufficient distance and/or barriers between the animals and the viewing public to assure the 
safety of the public and the animals. Trained handlers, leashes and stages, for example, are not 
substitutes for sufficient distance and/or barriers. 
 
35.7.7.2 Many states also have requirements regarding the storage and use of exotic animals in 
an entertainment venue. Become familiar and comply with all local rule, regulations and laws 
pertaining to the use of live animals. 
35.7.8 Safety Professionals 
35.7.8.1 Safety rules vary from state to state as do rules governing the use of animals, insurance 
and many other aspects of a circus performance. This list is not exhaustive, and anyone 
interested in circus safety should consult with professionals to ensure the safest atmosphere. 
There are many safety consultants available for all types of circus acts, so contact a professional 
to guarantee a safe environment.  
 
35.7.8.2 Circuses using incendiary devices must comply with all local and state ordinances as 
interpreted by the local authorities with jurisdiction over the event. 
35.8 Promotional Displays  
35.8.1 Companies sponsoring events may wish to advertise their product by way of a 
promotional display. These can range from advertising balloons and inflatables, purpose-made 
structures, video and virtual reality electronic games through to smaller merchandising stands.  
 
35.8.2 It is easy to overlook the effect that some of these displays might have on the safety of the 
event. Display structures should be handled in the same fashion as other temporary structures 
used for the event (see Chapter 19, Structures), including structural strength and integrity, and 
safety procedures pursuant to the Operations Management Plan. Obtain information as to the 
type of equipment that will be brought on site, its method of erection and particular hazards the 
equipment may pose. Drawings of any special structures should also be obtained along with the 
methods of erection and dismantling. 
 
35.8.3 Consider placement of promotional displays during the venue design phase to ensure that 
they do not obstruct emergency exit routes or hamper audience movement around the site. 
Inflatable balloons and displays must have appropriate space allocated to them and be suitably 
anchored. Banners of all types, soft goods and other materials capable of creating a sail effect 
must be designed for rapid lowering in the event that the wind loads exceed those in the 
emergency action plan. 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 319 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
315 
 
35.8.4 Those bringing the equipment onto site must also be instructed on the site safety policy. 
Any advertising stands should be treated in the same way as merchandising stands. Electrical 
equipment must come equipped with the relevant electrical test certificates and be installed by a 
competent electrician (see Chapter 17, Electrical Installations and Lighting). 
 
35.8.5 Some large-scale marketing events take place around major sporting events or air shows. 
Each activation of a marketing event should be considered a standalone, event-within-an-event. 
Attention should be paid to all details as if it were the main event. It is easy to underestimate the 
amount of effort needed to coordinate multiple event marketing activations. Be diligent in the 
expectations placed on staff assigned to coordinate multiple activations. 
 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 320 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
316 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
36. Acknowledgements 
The Event Safety Guide is the product of all of the effort and expertise of people who have come 
before us to make events safer.  Our attempt to compile and update industry best practices into 
one user-friendly resource would obviously have been impossible without the countless 
contributions of our predecessors. We gratefully acknowledge the work of all the associations 
referenced throughout this document.   
 
Of course, the Event Safety Guide is much more than a mash-up of existing resources.  It is, 
instead, the result of collaboration between subject matter experts in the many far-flung issues 
that must be addressed in order to run a safe and successful event.  It would take nearly another 
book to list all of the contributors to the Guide, and because it is a living document, any such 
acknowledgement would be outdated before it was committed to print.  So, to the Guides many 
dedicated contributors, we offer our sincere appreciation, as well as our request that you continue 
to offer your ideas and experiences as issues arise. 
 
There are a few people whose contributions to the Event Safety Guide, and to furthering ESAs 
mission of life safety first, has been so significant that we would be remiss in not 
acknowledging them individually.  
Event Safety Alliance Board of Directors 
Jim Digby, President 
Steven Adelman, Vice President 
Donald Cooper, Director 
Steve Lemon, Director 
Harold Hansen, Treasurer 
Stuart Ross, Director 
Charlie Hernandez, Director 
Roger Sandau, Director 
The Event Safety Alliance Founding Contributors 
Keith Bohn, TOMCAT USA 
John Brown, Brown United Staging 
James Chippendale, Doodson Insurance 
Brokerage 
Benny Collins, Production Manager 
John Conk, Production Manager 
Anthony Davis, Anthony Davis Entertainment 
Services, Inc. 
Jim Evans, Mountain Productions 
Mary Lou Figley, Stageco US 
Tim Franklin, Theta Consulting 
Jeff Giek, Rhino 
Brian Haas, Vistalogix Corporation 
Hadden Hippsley, Production Manager 
Kent Jorgensen, IATSE 
Ken Keberle, Event Safety Specialist 
Laurie Kirby, IMFCON 
Dave Lester, Clair Global 
Tom McClain, Projects of Interest 
Debi Moen, Projection, Lights and Staging 
News, Event Safety Guide General Editor 
Matt Monahan, Just a Bunch of Roadies 
Scott Nacheman, Thornton Tomasetti 
Tim Roberts, The Event Safety Shop 
Alan Rowe, IATSE Local 728 
Karl Ruling, PLASA 
David Shaw, Indiana State Fair 
Ron Stern, Production Manager 
Mike Tierney, Pepsi Center 
David VandenHeuvel, Weather Decision 
Technologies/WeatherOps 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 321 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
317 
 
Beyond these inspiring individuals who all contributed greatly to the success of this effort, we 
must recognize that completing a project like this often falls to a select few who spend countless 
volunteer hoursoften at a high personal costworking at the mechanics of design, lay out, 
writing, editing, reviewing and administrative support. Without the hard work, dedication and 
perseverance of these few, this book would simply never have been possible.   
 
 For their key work with the insurance industry and drumming up support for the Event Safety 
Alliances mission, Scott Carroll (Take 1 Insurance), James Chippendale, and Roger Sandau; 
 
 For his remarkable service as the online voice of the Event Safety Alliance, Jacob Worek, the 
ESAs new Director of Operationssocial medial director, blog editor, current affairs 
researcherand part of the organizations inner circle of visionaries; 
 
 For his technical expertise, dependability and leadership skill, Steve Lemon, the one who 
coordinates the efforts of the writing teams and contributes so much to the content;  
 
 For her ability to coordinate everyones efforts in such a gentle and kind way, Melissa 
Missy Allgood, the one who always seems to know exactly how far to push to compel 
others to action; 
 
 For his sage legal advice and master writing skills, Steve Adelman, the one whose faith and 
dedication to the mission is matched only by his talent, patience and generosity;  
 
 For his writing, editing, technical and organization skills, Donald Cooper, the Managing 
Editor of the Event Safety Guide; the one who is often delivered moose feces and asked to 
turn it into rose petalsby tomorrowand he does; and 
 
 For his selfless, enduring response to the tragedy of Indiana in a way that will save lives in 
the future, Jim Digby, the leader of this overall effort who continues to teach us the 
importance and relevance of character, hard work, commitment, and endurance. 
 
 
On a very personal note: Dr. Donald Cooper has given every moment of free time during his so 
called retirement to craft the language of this guide, and has worked tirelessly to see it come to 
life. We have thrown all manner of curve balls at him, which he has hit without once growing 
weary. Don was purposely chosen to lead the effort because of his impartiality. He is not, nor 
does he aspire to be, an entertainment professional. Rather, he is a safety and emergency 
response professionala man who does not want to see harm come needlessly to anyone.   
 
Dr. Cooper deserves more credit than words can express, and we as an industry will forever be 
indebted to him for taking this mission on when he could have been sipping boat drinks on a 
tropical island.  I am deeply humbled by his wisdom, his participation, and his endurance.  On 
behalf of everyone involved with the Event Safety Alliance, the event industry, and those whose 
lives you may save as a result of this work, we thank you Dr. Cooper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
~ Jim Digby 
\n\n=== PAGE 322 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
318 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
37. References 
American College of Emergency Physicians Publications. Provision of Emergency Medical Care 
for Crowds. American College of Emergency Physicians Publications, 1989-90. 
Australian and New Zealand Food Standards Authority. Food Standards Code. Canberra: 
Australian Government Publishing Service, Australian and New Zealand Food Standards 
Authority, 1987. 
Australian National Health and Medical Research Council. Australian Guidelines for 
Recreational Use of Water. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service, National 
Health and Medical Research Council, 1990. 
Australian Uniform Building Regulations Coordinating Council. Building Code of Australia. 
Australia: Australian Uniform Building Regulations Coordinating Council, 1990. 
Barbera, J. A., et al. Urban Search and Rescue. Emergency Medicine Clinics of North America 
May 1996. 
Berlonghi, Alexander. (1990). The special event risk management manual. Dana Point, CA: 
Alexander Berlonghi. 
Berlonghi, Alexander. (1996). Special event security management, loss prevention and 
emergency services. The Special Event Liability Series, Volume 2. Dana Point, CA: 
Alexander Berlonghi. 
Berlonghi, Alexander E. Understanding and Planning for Different Spectator Crowds. 
Engineering for Crowd Safety. Ed. R.A. Smith and J.F. Dickie. Elsevier Science 
Publications B.V., 1993. 
Billie, P., et al. Public Health at the 1984 Summer Olympics: The Los Angeles County 
Experience. American Journal of Public Health June 1988. 
Bock, H. C., et al. Demographics of Emergency medical Care at the Indianapolis 500 Mile Race 
(1983 - 1990) October 1992. 
Canadian Government. Aid of the Civil Power: Chapter N, Sections 274-285, in Revised Statutes 
of Canada. Canada: Canadian Government, 1985. 
Chapman, K.R., et al. Medical Services for Outdoor Rock Music Festivals. CMA Journal 15 
April 1982: 935-938. 
City of Fremantle. Concerts in Fremantle. Western Australia: City of Fremantle, 1996. 
City of Keene. Special Event Planning Checklist. New Hampshire: City of Keene. 
Controlling the Rock Festival Crowd. Security World June 1980: 40-43. 
http://www.crowdsafe.com 
Cooper, D.C., Editor. (2005). Fundamentals of Search and Rescue. Burlington, MA: Jones & 
Bartlett. 
Curry, Jack. WoodstockThe Summer of Our Lives. New York: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1989. 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency. Weapons of Mass Destruction Handbook. Washington: 
Defense Threat Reduction Agency, 1 July 1999. 
Department of the Treasury: Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. ATF Vehicle Bomb 
Explosion Hazard and Evacuation Distance Tables. Washington, 22 Dec. 1999. 
http://www.disastersrus.org/emtools/Terrorism/bomb_sem/bomatftb.htm 
\n\n=== PAGE 325 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
321 
 
International Association of Venue Managers [IAVM]. (2013). Academy for Venue Safety and 
Security [AVSS], 5-day course. Coppell, Texas: IAVM. More information available online 
at: www.iavm.org. 
James, S.H., et al. Medical and Toxicological Aspects of the Watkins Glen Rock Concert. 
Journal of Forensic Sciences, n.d. (circa 1974): 71-82. 
Leonard, R.B. Medical Support for Mass Gatherings. Emergency Medicine Clinics of North 
America May 1996. 
Lewis, J. M. A Protocol for the Comparative Analysis of Sports Crowd Violence. International 
Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disaster 1988: 221-225. 
Lewis, J.M. Theories of the Crowd: Some Cross-Cultural Perspectives. Easingwold Papers No. 
4: Lessons Learned from Crowd-Related Disasters. Yorkshire: Emergency Planning 
College, 1992. 
Lichtenstein, Irwin. EMS at Rock Concerts. Fire Chief Magazine Nov. 1983: 44-46. 
Madden, Turner. (1998). Public assembly facility law: A guide for managers of arenas, 
auditoriums, convention centers, performing arts centers, race tracks and stadiums. Irving, 
TX: IAVM. 
Managing crowds safely. A guide for organisers at events and venues HSG154 (Second edition) 
HSE Books 2000 ISBN 978 0 7176 1834 7 
Mariano, J. P. First Aid for Live Aid. JEMS Feb. 1986. 
Miami-Dade County Office of Emergency Management. Concept of Operations Plan, 
SuperBowl XXXIII. Florida: Miami-Dade County Office of Emergency Management. Jan. 
1999. 
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children [NCMEC]. (2011). Law enforcement 
policy and procedures for reports of missing and exploited children: A model. Alexandria, 
VA: NCMEC. Retrieved on December 25, 2013, from www.missingkids.com 
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children [NCMEC].(2011). What Should You Do 
If You See A Child Who Appears To Be Lost? Alexandria, VA: NCMEC. Retrieved on 
December 25, 2013, from www.missingkids.com/en_US/publications/PDF15A.pdf 
National Domestic Preparedness Office. WMD Threats: Sample Guidelines Reissue. Special 
Bulletin. Washington: National Domestic Preparedness Office, 12 Jan 2000. 
National Interagency Fire Center. ICS Glossary. In Incident Command System National 
Training Curriculum. Boise, Idaho: National Interagency Fire Center, Oct. 1994. 
National Interagency Fire Center. ICS Position Descriptions and Responsibilities. In Incident 
Command System National Training Curriculum. Boise, Idaho: National Interagency Fire 
Center, Oct. 1994. 
National Interagency Fire Center. Organizing for Incidents or Events, Module 8. In Incident 
Command System National Training Curriculum. Boise, Idaho: National Interagency Fire 
Center, Oct. 1994. 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health [NIOSH], U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services [DHHS]. (1998). Criteria for a recommended standard: Occupational 
noise exposure. NIOSH Publication 98-126. Washington, DC: DHHS. Retrieved on 
January 22, 2013, from http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/98-126/pdfs/98-126.pdf 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration [NOAA], National Weather Service [NWS]. 
(2012). Lightning safety: Large venues: A toolkit for lightning preparedness and related 
safety decision making. Silver Spring, MD: NOAA/NWS. Available online at: 
www.lightningsafety.noaa.gov. 
\n\n=== PAGE 341 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
337 
 
Qualified 
Person (OSHA) 
One who, by possession of a recognized degree, certificate, or professional 
standing, or who by extensive knowledge, training and experience, has 
successfully demonstrated his ability to solve or resolve problems relating to 
the subject matter, the work or the project (29 CFR 1926.32(m)). 
Ready Box 
A sturdy container for storage of fireworks devices to be reloaded at the 
discharge site of a display (NFPA 1123, 2014). 
Risk 
The probability that a hazard will cause actual harm. (George Thompson-
Focul Guide to Safety in Live Performance. Also see Hazard above.) 
SDS 
Safety Data Sheets (formerly MSDS); manufacturer provided paperwork 
regarding a product's hazard identification and safe usage 
SNR 
Single Number Rating  an overall measure of the attenuation of hearing 
protection.  The SNR gives an indication of how good a product may be at 
reducing overall volume, however it does not identify how frequencies are 
absorbed across the spectrum. 
SOW 
The division of work to be performed under a contract or subcontract in the 
completion of a project, typically broken out into specific tasks with 
deadlines. (BusinessDictionary.com) 
Span of Control 
The number of individuals a supervisor is responsible for, usually expressed 
as the ratio of supervisors to individuals. (Under the NIMS, an appropriate 
span of control is between 1:3 and 1:7.) 
Special Effect 
(Pyrotechnics) 
A visual or audible effect used for entertainment purposes, often produced to 
create an illusion (NFPA 1126, 2011). 
Special Event 
A non-routine activity within a community that brings together a large number 
of people. Emphasis is not placed on the total number of people attending but 
rather the impact on the communitys ability to respond to a large-scale 
emergency or disaster or the exceptional demands that the activity places on 
response services. A communitys special event requires additional planning, 
preparedness, and mitigation efforts of local emergency response and public 
safety agencies (FEMAs Special Events Contingency Planning Job Aids 
Manual, 2005, Updated 2010). 
Standard 
Operating 
Procedure 
(SOP) 
Complete reference document or an operations manual that provides the 
purpose, authorities, duration, and details for the preferred method of 
performing a single function or a number of interrelated functions in a 
uniform manner. 
Steward 
In this body of work, steward is used to identify a category of event staffing 
who are not security yet interact with the public and/or attendees to an event. 
A synonym may be Host. Stewards may be paid staff or volunteer staff. 
Storage Day 
Box, Type 3 
(fireworks) 
Portable outdoor explosive magazines for the temporary storage of high 
explosives while attended (for example, a day-box), subject to the 
limitations prescribed by 27 CFR 555.206 and 555.213. Other classes of 
explosives materials may also be stored in type 3 magazines. (27 CFR 
555.203[c]). 
Strike Team 
A specified combination of the same kind and type of resources with common 
communications and a Leader. 
\n\n=== PAGE 345 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
341 
 
Appendix A  The National 
Incident Management System 
(NIMS) and Incident Command 
System (ICS) 
This Appendix is derived from Chapter 3 of FEMAs Special Events Contingency Planning Job 
Aids Manual (2005, Updated 2010). 
Introduction 
The importance of pre-event planning, organization, and leadership cannot be over emphasized. 
Many suggest a planning team use the Incident Command System (ICS) to manage the event 
planning process effectively. In a large-scale event involving numerous agencies, people can 
become confused as to who is in charge, what role everyone plays, and what responsibilities 
everyone has. ICS is an excellent tool that can resolve these issues. This appendix discusses ICS, 
how it can be applied to special events, and the concept of Unified Command. 
 
Unfortunately, even the best-planned special events may not run entirely smoothly. During any 
special event, you must be prepared to respond to one or more incidents that may occur during 
the event. The way these incidents are managed has a great deal to do with the ultimate success 
of the special event. Everyone must know his or her role and tasks, and where to seek 
information. This appendix also discusses the use of ICS during these situations. 
National Incident Management System 
The National Incident Management System (NIMS) provides a systematic, proactive approach to 
guide departments and agencies at all levels of government, nongovernmental organizations, and 
the private sector to work seamlessly to prevent, protect against, respond to, recover from, and 
mitigate the effects of incidents, regardless of cause, size, location, or complexity, in order to 
reduce the loss of life and property and harm to the environment. NIMS works hand in hand with 
the National Response Framework (NRF). NIMS provides the template for the management of 
incidents, while the NRF provides the structure and mechanisms for national-level policy for 
incident management. 
 
NIMS integrates existing best practices into a consistent, nationwide, systematic approach to 
incident management that is applicable at all levels of government, nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs), and the private sector, and across functional disciplines in an all-hazards 
context. Five major components make up this systems approach: Preparedness, Communications 
\n\n=== PAGE 352 ===\nhttp://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
 
 
 
348 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
Command and Management Overview:  
Multiagency Coordination Systems 
Multiagency coordination is a process that allows all levels of government and all disciplines to 
work together more efficiently and effectively. Multiagency coordination occurs across the 
different disciplines involved in incident management, across jurisdictional lines, or across levels 
of government. Multiagency coordination can and does occur on a regular basis whenever 
personnel from different agencies interact in such activities as preparedness, prevention, 
response, recovery, and mitigation. 
 
Often, cooperating agencies develop a Multiagency Coordination System (MACS) to better 
define how they will work together and to work together more efficiently; however, multiagency 
coordination can take place without established protocols. MACS may be put in motion 
regardless of the location, personnel titles, or organizational structure. 
 
Initially the Incident Command/Unified Command and the Liaison Officer may be able to 
provide all needed mulitagency coordination at the scene. However, as the incident grows in size 
and complexity, off-site support and coordination may be required. 
 
Integral elements of MACS are dispatch procedures and protocols, the incident command 
structure, and the coordination and support activities taking place within an activated Emergency 
Operations Center. Fundamentally, MACS provide support, coordination, and assistance with 
policy-level decisions to the ICS structure managing an incident. 
 
 
\n\n=== PAGE 357 ===\n 
 
http://eventsafetyalliance.org/ 
 
 
The Event Safety Guide (v1.1) 
 
353 
 
Appendix C  Requirements for 
Outdoor Event Structures, 
Preparation Checklist 
Use this list as a tool in conjunction with requirement details in Structures chapter. 
 
 
 
Action 
Completion  
Date 
Verified 
1. 
Structure assembly drawings  
 
 
 
2. 
Stamped engineering calculations 
 
 
 
3. 
Rigged component list with description 
 
 
 
4. 
Rigging plot overlay on structure 
 
 
 
5. 
Site layout drawing 
 
 
 
6. 
Permits 
 
 
 
7. 
Inspection records of components 
 
 
 
8. 
Operations Management Plan 
 
 
 
9. 
Local weather service resource established 
 
 
 
10.  Responsible individuals identified 
 
 
 
11. Pre-event meeting reviewing OMP 
 
 
 
12. Completion certificate of structure 
 
 
 
 
 
\n