EXTRACTED CONTENT: beam-hazard-calculations.pdf
============================================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
 
                                                        PH 425.753.5644 - FX 866.438.1531 roberta@lasersafetyservices.com  www.lasersafetyservice.com   
                                         27012 47th Place South E -206, Kent, WA 98032  
  
ROBERTA MCHATTON/LSO  
OWNER - CONSULTANT  
LASER SAFETY SERVICES , LLC 
T: 425 -753-5644 
F: 866 -438-1531 
Roberta@lasersafetyservices.com  
www.lasersafetyservices.com  
 
 
General Information:  
Roberta McHatton, owner of Laser Safety Services  (LSS), has been providing laser safety 
consultation since 1995, specializing in the entertainment, display industries and tradeshow 
industries. Roberta McHatton is a leader in laser safety as an active membe r of several safety 
standard organizations (see below) working with all laser industries to create laser safety 
guidelines/standards and increase laser safety awareness worldwide.  While entertainment is our 
specialty, an industry that can pose a high risk of potential exposure to the general public, our 
company is an ideal choice for companies developing other laser applications such as airspace 
operations or that require special safety control measures  and/or need assistance with the 
regulatory reporting p rocess.  
 
Laser Safety Services is very selective in who we represent; a practice that has enabled LSS to 
successfully advocate for cutting edge laser effects that safely bring the use of lasers to the 
public in new and very exciting designs; adding the bi g “WOW” factor to the largest installations 
and touring entertainment events worldwide.  
 
Roberta handles the laser s afety needs for laser companies  that provide lasers for live televised 
productions such  as the iHeart Music Awards, America’s Got Talent and  the Grammys. Roberta 
oversees all aspects of laser safety relating to tours for artists  such as  Metallica, Ariana Grande , 
Katy Perry, Queen, Electric Daisy Carnival, Shambala, Shpongle , Burning Man, Pet Shop Boys 
and MUSE tours in the USA as well as Corpo rate event s such as Sales Force, Microsoft, Boeing.  
Roberta assists a wide variety of laser manufacturers of laser shows and/or laser entertainment 
projection systems.  
 
Laser Safety Services the following services:  
• Laser Safety Officer (LSO) training course  – see description below.  
• LSS audits laser shows and manufacturers of laser projectors.  
• LSS prepares all the documentation (registrations/reports/notifications) for  Federal , 
State and local governing agencies for their select clientele .  
• For outdoor shows/displays LSS handles F ederal Aviation Administration (FAA)  
notifications  

--- PAGE 2 ---
 
                                                        PH 425.753.5644 - FX 866.438.1531 roberta@lasersafetyservices.com  www.lasersafetyservice.com   
                                         27012 47th Place South E -206, Kent, WA 98032  
  
• Roberta is currently developing an online laser safety training program that will ensure 
owner/operators obtain proper training prior to use.  
 
Roberta has authored several arti cles on laser safety, most recently for the magazine Photonics 
Spectra August 2015 “How Safe Are Laser Shows” and is in the process of co -authoring a laser 
safety  book titled  “Essentials of Laser Safety for the Entertainment and Display Industry”.  
 
Backgro und/Experience:  
Former Director of Production/Technical Services and Laser Safety Officer for Laser Fantasy 
International (LFI) where Roberta handled all aspects of laser entertainment applications for 
national and international installat ions and shows. Ro berta was  employed with LFI from 1995 to 
2004, when the business closed. Roberta/LSS continues to work with the new owners of LFI.  
 
Roberta /LSS has provided outdoor laser safety training for Federal Aviation Authorities and 
Transport Canada Aviation Inspectors a s well as  members of SAE G -10 committee. Roberta is 
often consulted by government agencies and other laser companies when laser safety issues 
are of concern.  
 
2005-Current:  
Owner of Laser Safety Services “Providing Safe Laser Solutions”  
 
Active  Member of the following Professional Organizations:  
  
ANSI (American National Standards Institute) Z136 
ANSI creates the laser safety standards upon which national and international 
regulations are based. Roberta is one of 2 memb ers of the laser entertainment  industry 
ASC Z136 (Accredited Standards Co mmittee) who vote laser safety standards into 
publication. ANSI creates las er safety standards upon which national and international 
regulations are based. In addition to the ANSI A ccredited Standards Committee  (ASC) 
Roberta is on ANSI  subcommi ttees ANSI Z136.1 Safe Use of Lasers , ANSI Z136.4 
Measurement , ANSI Z1 36.6 Safe Use of Lasers Outdoors, ANSI Z136.10 Safe Use of 
Laser in Entertainment, Display and Exhibitions .  In addition to the above St andard 
Subcommittee s Roberta is a member of the following Technical Subcommittees: TSC -1 
Bio-Effects and Medical Surveillance  and TSC 4 Control Measures and Training . 
 
 
SAE (Society of Automotive Engineering)  
 SAE develops safety standard s for the aviation industry. As a member of the  
 G-10T committee, working with other members of  the aviation industry such as NASA, 
FAA, to create safety standards for outdoor use of lasers in airspace.  

--- PAGE 3 ---
 
                                                        PH 425.753.5644 - FX 866.438.1531 roberta@lasersafetyservices.com  www.lasersafetyservice.com   
                                         27012 47th Place South E -206, Kent, WA 98032  
  
 
 
ILDA (International Laser Display Associations)  
Roberta was elected to the Board in 2017 and is an active member of the  ILDA Laser 
Safety Committee , the ILDA Ethics Committee  and the ILDA U.S. R egulatory Committee.  
 
ESA (Event Safety Alliance)  
ESA is a recently formed organization that ha s developed and published this year the 
first Event Safety Guide to full fill the n eed in the USA to provide best practices to event 
producers on all aspects of h ow to safely produce an event. Roberta volunteered to 
write the section on laser s afety which is included in the guide.  
 
Publications:  
Aside from being standards publications such as ANSI and SAE Roberta has written articles for 
industry magazines such as Photonic Spectra and PLSN. Copies of these articles are available 
upon request.  
Roberta is collaborating with Ken Barat, Phd, CLSO to write a book that will be a useful manual 
for the entertainment/display industry to be published in 2018 . 
 
Laser Safety Training:  
Laser safety training, according to American National Standards Institute’s ANSI Z136.1, shall 
be provided to all personnel that will be routinely working lasers and/or inspecting laser 
installations/venues. LSS will conduct an extensive laser safety training course for you and/or 
your staff which includes a power point presentation with test, a copy  of Laser Safety Services 
Laser Safety Manual that includes forms required for record keeping. Upon successful 
completion of the course trainees will be receive a Laser Safety Officer &/or Inspector 
Certificate of Successf ul Completion. Training takes appr oximately 4 hours.  
 
You and/or your staff will learn about the following subjects:  
o Articles on Laser Safety: Laser Types, Classification and Operation, Nominal Hazard 
Zone, Control Measures, Laser Safety Standards – an Overview, Glossary  
o USAF Eye Haza rds: United States Air Force document USAFSAM -TR-88-21R Medical 
Management of Combat Laser Eye Injuries.  
o ANSI Z136.1 and ANSI Z136.6: Review of American National Standards Institute Z136 
laser safety standards  
o FDA/CDRH Regulations: Review compliance gu ide for laser products including laser show 
guidelines and notification procedures.  
o Procedures for Outdoor Laser Operations: Review policy, responsibilities and guidelines 
for outdoor laser operations. Includes a manual for training Laser Safety Airspace  
Observers.  

--- PAGE 4 ---
 
                                                        PH 425.753.5644 - FX 866.438.1531 roberta@lasersafetyservices.com  www.lasersafetyservice.com   
                                         27012 47th Place South E -206, Kent, WA 98032  
  
o Detailed review of Health and Safety Risk Assessment, Quality Control Safety Checklists 
and suggested Inspection document ation 
o Mock setup and/or inspections using an actual laser projector for hands on experience 
when training conducted ons ite 
 
 
 
Certification Qualifications:  
o There are test questions at the end of each section of the PPT presentation which 
participants are expected to answer 80% correctly  
o There will be a mock setup and/or inspection for hands on experience. Trainees will  be 
observed by trainer to access retention and successful execution in laser safety concepts 
in practice.  
 
Why choose Laser Safety Services (LSS)?  
 
Our specialty at LSS is entertainment, display and tradeshows. Applications of lasers in the 
entertainment industry pose the greatest possible risk to the general public. Because 
entertainment applications use high powered lasers thus present the greatest possible risk to 
the general public we at LSS are confident we can provide valuable consultation to other 
industries; especially those that operate in open airspace or require special control measure 
solutions to their laser applications. We can help you deliver your special laser 
effects /applications  safely each and every time!  
 
 
 
 
 
