

--- PAGE 1 ---
Laser Definitions 
The definitions of the terms listed below are based on a 
pragmatic rather than a basic approach. Therefore, the 
terms defined are limited to those actually used in this 
standard and its appendixes and are in no way intended to 
constitute a dictionary of terms used in the laser field as a 
whole. 
absorption. Transformation of radiant energy to a 
different form of energy by interaction with matter. 
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Z136.1 - 2000 
3 
accessible emission limit (AEL). The maximum 
accessible emission level permitted within a particular 
class. 
accessible optical radiation. Optical radiation to which 
the human eye or skin may be exposed for the condition 
(operation, maintenance, or service) specified. 
alpha max (αmax). The angular limit beyond which 
extended source MPEs for a given exposure duration are 
expressed as a constant radiance or integrated radiance. 
This value is defined as 100 mrad. 
alpha min (αmin). See limiting angular subtense. 
aperture. An opening or window through which radiation 
passes. 
aphakic. Term describing an eye in which the crystalline 
lens is absent. 
apparent visual angle. The angular subtense of the source 
as calculated from source size and distance from the eye. It 
is not the beam divergence of the source (see Section 8.1 
and Figure B4 for criteria). 
attenuation. The decrease in the radiant flux as it passes 
through an absorbing or scattering medium. 
authorized personnel. Individuals approved by 
management to install, operate, or service laser 
equipment. 
average power. The total energy in an exposure or 
emission divided by the duration of the exposure or 
emission. 
aversion response. Closure of the eyelid, or movement of 
the head to avoid an exposure to a noxious stimulant or 
bright light. In this standard, the aversion response to an 
exposure from a bright laser source is assumed to occur 
within 0.25 s, including the blink reflex time. 
beam. A collection of rays characterized by direction, 
diameter (or dimensions), and divergence (or 
convergence). 
beam diameter. The distance between diametrically 
opposed points in that cross-section of a beam where the 
power per unit area is 1/e (0.368) times that of the peak 
power per unit area. 
beam divergence (φ). See divergence. 
blink reflex. See aversion response. 
CA. Correction factor which increases the MPE values in 
the near infrared (IR-A) spectral band (700-1400 nm) 
based upon reduced absorption properties of melanin 
pigment granules found in the skin and in the retinal 

--- PAGE 2 ---
pigment epithelium. 
CB. Correction factor which increases the MPE values in 
the red end of the visible spectrum (450-600 nm), because 
of greatly reduced photochemical hazards. 
CC. Correction factor which increases the MPE values for 
ocular exposure because of pre-retinal absorption of radiant 
energy in the spectral region between 1150 and 1400 nm. 
CE. Correction factor used for calculating the extendedsource 
MPE for the eye from the small-source MPE, when 
the laser source subtends a visual angle exceeding αmin. 
CP. Correction factor which reduces the MPE for 
repetitive-pulse exposure of the eye. 
calorimeter. A device for measuring the total amount of 
energy absorbed from a source of electromagnetic 
radiation. 
carcinogen. An agent potentially capable of causing 
cancer. 
coagulation. The process of congealing by an increase in 
viscosity characterized by a condensation of material from 
a liquid to a gelatinous or solid state. 
coherent. A light beam is said to be coherent when the 
electric vector at any point in it is related to that at any 
other point by a definite, continuous function. 
collateral radiation. Any electromagnetic radiation, 
except laser radiation, emitted by a laser or laser system 
which is physically necessary for its operation. 
collecting optics. Lenses or optical instruments having 
magnification and thereby producing an increase in 
energy or power density. Such devices may include 
telescopes, binoculars, microscopes, or loupes. 
collimated beam. Effectively, a “parallel” beam of light 
with very low divergence or convergence. 
conjunctival discharge (of the eye). Increased secretion 
of mucus from the surface of the eyeball. 
continuous wave (CW). The output of a laser which is 
operated in a continuous rather than a pulsed mode. In this 
standard, a laser operating with a continuous output for a 
period > 0.25 s is regarded as a CW laser. 
controlled area. An area where the occupancy and 
activity of those within is subject to control and 
supervision for the purpose of protection from radiation 
hazards. 
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Z136.1 - 2000 
4 
cornea. The transparent outer coat of the human eye 
which covers the iris and the crystalline lens. The cornea is 
the main refracting element of the eye. 
critical frequency. The pulse repetition frequency 
above which the laser output is considered continuous 
wave (CW). For a 10 s exposure to a small source, the 
critical frequency is 55 kHz for wavelengths between 0.4 
and 1.05 µm, and 20 kHz for wavelengths between 1.05 
and 1.4 µm. 
cryogenics. The branch of physical science dealing with 
very low temperatures. 
denaturation. Functional modification of the properties of 

--- PAGE 3 ---
protein by structural alteration via heat or photochemical 
processes. 
depigmentation. The removal of the pigment of melanin 
granules from human tissues. 
dermatology. A branch of medical science that deals with 
the skin, its structure, functions, and diseases. 
diffuse reflection. Change of the spatial distribution of a 
beam of radiation when it is reflected in many directions by 
a surface or by a medium. 
diopter. A measure of the power of a lens, defined as 1/fo, 
where fo is the focal length of the lens in meters. 
divergence (φ). For the purposes of this standard, 
divergence is taken as the plane angle projection of the 
cone that includes 1 - 1/e (i.e. 63.2%) of the total radiant 
energy or power. The value of the divergence is expressed 
in radians or milliradians. 
NOTE: Many lasers have astigmatic divergence, i.e., have 
different divergences in two axes. In such cases, the divergences 
may be considered separately or averaged. 
effective energy (Qeff). Energy, in joules, through the 
applicable measurement aperture. 
effective power (Φeff). Power, in watts, through the 
applicable measurement aperture. 
electromagnetic radiation. The flow of energy consisting 
of orthogonally vibrating electric and magnetic fields lying 
transverse to the direction of propagation. X-ray, 
ultraviolet, visible, infrared, and radio waves occupy 
various portions of the electromagnetic spectrum and differ 
only in frequency, wavelength, and photon energy. 
embedded laser. An enclosed laser with an assigned class 
number higher than the inherent capability of the laser 
system in which it is incorporated, where the system's 
lower classification is appropriate due to the engineering 
features limiting accessible emission. 
enclosed laser. A laser that is contained within a 
protective housing of itself or of the laser or laser system in 
which it is incorporated. Opening or removing of the 
protective housing provides additional access to laser 
radiation above the applicable MPE than possible with the 
protective housing in place (an embedded laser is an 
example of one type of enclosed laser). 
endoscope. An instrument utilized for the examination of 
the interior of a canal or hollow organ. 
energy. The capacity for doing work. Energy content is 
commonly used to characterize the output from pulsed 
lasers, and is generally expressed in joules (J). 
epidemiology. A branch of medical science that deals with 
the incidence, distribution, and control of disease in a 
population. 
epithelium (of the cornea). The layer of cells forming the 
outer surface of the cornea. 
erythema. Redness of the skin due to congestion of the 
capillaries. 
extended source. A source of optical radiation with an 
angular subtense at the cornea larger than αmin. See 
small source. 

--- PAGE 4 ---
fail-safe interlock. An interlock where the failure of a 
single mechanical or electrical component of the interlock 
will cause the system to go into, or remain in, a safe mode. 
focal length. The distance, measured in centimeters, 
from the secondary nodal point of a lens to the secondary 
focal point. For a thin lens imaging a distant source, the 
focal length is the distance between the lens and the focal 
point. 
focal point. The point toward which radiation converges 
or from which radiation diverges or appears to diverge. 
fundus. See ocular fundus. 
funduscopic. Examination of the fundus (rear) of the eye. 
half-power point. The value on either the leading or 
trailing edge of a laser pulse at which the power is one-half 
of its maximum value. 
hertz (Hz). The unit which expresses the frequency of a 
periodic oscillation in cycles per second. 
infrared. The region of the electromagnetic spectrum 
between the long-wavelength extreme of the visible 
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Z136.1 - 2000 
5 
spectrum (about 0.7 µm) and the shortest microwaves 
(about 1 mm). 
infrared radiation. Electromagnetic radiation with 
wavelengths which lie within the range 0.7 µm to 1 mm. 
installation. Placement and connection of laser 
equipment at the appropriate site to enable intended 
operation. 
integrated radiance. The integral of the radiance over 
the exposure duration, expressed in joules-per-squarecentimeter 
per-steradian (J⋅cm-2⋅sr-1). 
intrabeam viewing. The viewing condition whereby the 
eye is exposed to all or part of a laser beam (See small- source viewing). 
ionizing radiation. Electromagnetic radiation having a 
sufficiently large photon energy to directly ionize atomic or 
molecular systems with a single quantum event. 
iris. The circular pigmented membrane which lies behind 
the cornea of the human eye. The iris is perforated by the 
pupil. 
irradiance. Radiant power incident per unit area 
upon a surface, expressed in watts-per-square-centimeter 
(W⋅cm-2). Synonym: power density. 
Jaeger's test. Samples of type of various sizes printed on a 
card for testing close visual acuity. An analogue of the 
Snellen chart for distant visual acuity. 
joule. A unit of energy. 1 joule = 1 watt • second. 
Lambertian surface. An ideal surface whose emitted or 
reflected radiance is independent of the viewing angle. 
laser. A device that produces radiant energy pre- dominantly by stimulated emission. Laser radiation may 
be highly coherent temporally, or spatially, or both. An 
acronym for Light Amplification by Stimulated 
Emission of Radiation. 
laser barrier. A device used to block or attenuate 
incident direct or diffuse laser radiation. Laser barriers 
are frequently used during times of service to the laser 
system when it is desirable to establish a boundary for a 

--- PAGE 5 ---
temporary (or permanent) laser controlled area (See 
Section 4.6.4). 
laser diode. A laser employing a forward-biased 
semiconductor junction as the active medium. 
Synonyms: injection laser; semiconductor laser. 
laser pointer. A Class II or Class IIIa laser product that 
is usually hand held that emits a low-divergence visible 
beam of less than 5 milliwatts and is intended for 
designating specific objects or images during 
discussions, lectures or presentations as well as for the 
aiming of firearms or other visual targeting practice. 
laser safety officer (LSO). One who has authority to 
monitor and enforce the control of laser hazards and effect 
the knowledgeable evaluation and control of laser hazards. 
laser system. An assembly of electrical, mechanical, and 
optical components which includes a laser. 
lesion. An abnormal change in the structure of an organ or 
part due to injury or disease. 
limiting angular subtense (αmin). The apparent visual 
angle which divides small-source viewing from 
extended-source viewing (see Section 8.1 for criteria). 
αmin is defined as 1.5 mrad. 
limiting aperture (Df ). The maximum diameter of a 
circle over which radiance and radiant exposure are 
averaged for purposes of hazard evaluation and 
classification. 
limiting cone angle (γ). Angle of acceptance for 
measurement of photochemical hazard for extended 
sources with radiance and integrated radiance (see 
Section 9.2.1.1, Table 5b and Figure 3). 
limiting exposure duration (Tmax). An exposure duration 
which is specifically limited by the design or intended 
use(s) (see Section 8 for examples). 
macula. The small uniquely pigmented specialized area of 
the retina of the eye, which, in normal individuals, is 
predominantly employed for acute central vision (i.e. area 
of best visual acuity). 
maintenance. Performance of those adjustments or 
procedures (specified in user information provided by the 
manufacturer with the laser or laser system), which are to 
be performed by the user to ensure the intended 
performance of the product. It does not include operation 
or service as defined in this section. 
maximum permissible exposure (MPE). The level of 
laser radiation to which a person may be exposed without 
hazardous effect or adverse biological changes in the eye or 
skin. The criteria for MPE for the eye and skin are detailed 
in Section 8. 
meter. A unit of length in the international system of 
units; currently defined as the length of a path traversed 
in vacuum by light during a period of 1/299792458 
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Z136.1 - 2000 
6 
seconds. Typically, the meter is subdivided into the 
following units: 
centimeter (cm) = 10-2 m 

--- PAGE 6 ---
millimeter (mm) = 10-3 m 
micrometer (µm) = 10-6 m 
nanometer (nm) = 10-9 m 
minimum viewing distance. The minimum distance at 
which the eye can produce a focused image of a diffuse 
source, usually assumed to be 10 cm. 
nominal hazard zone (NHZ). The space within which 
the level of the direct, reflected, or scattered radiation 
during normal operation exceeds the applicable MPE. 
Exposure levels beyond the boundary of the NHZ are 
below the appropriate MPE level. 
nominal ocular hazard distance (NOHD). The 
distance along the axis of the unobstructed beam from a 
laser, fiber end, or connector to the human eye beyond 
which the irradiance or radiant exposure, during 
installation or service, is not expected to exceed the 
appropriate MPE. 
non-beam hazard. A class of hazards that result from 
factors other than direct human exposure to a laser beam. 
ocular fundus. The interior posterior surface of the eye 
(the retina), as seen upon ophthalmoscopic examination. 
operation. The performance of the laser or laser system 
over the full range of its intended functions (normal 
operation). It does not include maintenance or service as 
defined in this section. 
ophthalmoscope. An instrument for examining the interior 
of the eye. 
optically aided viewing. Viewing the laser source with 
an optical device such as an eye loupe, hand magnifier, 
microscope, binoculars, telescope, etc. Optically aided 
viewing does not include viewing with corrective 
eyewear or with indirect image converters. 
optical density (Dλ). Logarithm to the base ten of the 
reciprocal of the transmittance. That is, 
Dλ = - log10 τλ 
where τλ is the transmittance. 
NOTE: The higher the optical density, the lower the 
transmittance. Ten times the optical density is equal to the 
transmission loss expressed in decibels, e.g., an optical density 
of 0.3 corresponds to a transmission loss of 3 dB, i.e., 50 
percent. 
photophobia. An unusual intolerance of light. Also, an 
aversion to light usually caused by physical discomfort 
upon exposure to light. 
photosensitizers. Substances which increase the 
sensitivity of a material to irradiation by electromagnetic 
energy. 
pigment epithelium (of the retina). The layer of cells 
which contain brown or black pigment granules next to and 
behind the rods and cones. 
plasma radiation. Black-body radiation generated by 
luminescence of matter in a laser-generated plume. 
point source. No longer used. See small source. 
power. The rate at which energy is emitted, transferred, or 
received. Unit: watts (joules per second). 
protective housing. An enclosure surrounding the laser or 

--- PAGE 7 ---
laser system that prevents access to laser radiation above 
the applicable MPE level. The aperture through which the 
useful beam is emitted is not part of the protective housing. 
The protective housing may enclose associated optics and a 
workstation, and limits access to other associated radiant 
energy emissions and to electrical hazards associated with 
components and terminals. 
pulse duration. The duration of a laser pulse, usually 
measured as the time interval between the half-power 
points on the leading and trailing edges of the pulse. 
pulse-repetition frequency (PRF). The number of 
pulses occurring per second, expressed in hertz. 
pulsed laser. A laser which delivers its energy in the form 
of a single pulse or a train of pulses. In this standard, the 
duration of a pulse < 0.25 s. 
pupil. The variable aperture in the iris through which light 
travels to the interior of the eye. 
Q-switch. A device for producing very short (~10-250 ns), 
intense laser pulses by enhancing the storage and dumping 
of electronic energy in and out of the lasing medium, 
respectively. 
Q-switched laser. A laser that emits short (~10-250 ns), 
high-power pulses by means of a Q-switch. 
radian (rad). A unit of angular measure equal to the angle 
subtended at the center of a circle by an arc whose length is 
equal to the radius of the circle. 1 radian ~ 57.3 degrees; 2 
π radians = 360 degrees. 
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Z136.1 - 2000 
7 
radiance. Radiant flux or power output per unit solid 
angle per unit area expressed in watts-per-centimeter 
squared-per-steradian (W ⋅ cm-2 ⋅ sr-1). 
radiant energy. Energy emitted, transferred, or received in 
the form of radiation. Unit: joules (J). 
radiant exposure. Surface density of the radiant energy 
received, expressed in units of joules-per-centimeter 
squared (J⋅cm-2). 
radiant flux. Power emitted, transferred, or received in the 
form of radiation. Unit: watts (W). Also called radiant 
power. 
radiant intensity. Quotient of the radiant flux leaving a 
source and propagated into an element of solid angle 
containing the direction, by the element of solid angle. 
Radiant intensity is expressed in units of watts per 
steradian (W⋅sr-1). 
radiant power. Power emitted, transferred, or received 
in the form of radiation, expressed in watts (W). 
Synonym: radiant flux. 
radiometry. A branch of science that deals with the 
measurement of radiation. For the purposes of this 
standard, radiometry will be limited to the measurement of 
infrared, visible, and ultraviolet radiation. 
Rayleigh scattering. Scattering of radiation in the course 
of its passage through a medium containing particles whose 
sizes are small compared with the wavelength of the 

--- PAGE 8 ---
radiation. 
reflectance. The ratio of total reflected radiant power to 
total incident power. Also called reflectivity. 
reflection. Deviation of radiation following incidence on a 
surface. 
refraction. The bending of a beam of light in 
transmission through an interface between two dissimilar 
media or in a medium whose refractive index is a 
continuous function of position (graded index medium). 
refractive index (of a medium). Denoted by n, the ratio 
of the velocity of light in vacuum to the phase velocity in 
the medium. Synonym: index of refraction. 
repetitive pulse laser. A laser with multiple pulses of 
radiant energy occurring in a sequence. 
retina. The sensory membrane that receives the incident 
image formed by the cornea and lens of the human eye. 
The retina lines the inside of the eye. 
retinal hazard region. Optical radiation with 
wavelengths between 0.4 and 1.4 µm, where the 
principal hazard is usually to the retina. 
safety latch. A mechanical device designed to slow direct 
entry to a controlled area. 
scanning laser. A laser having a time-varying direction, 
origin, or pattern of propagation with respect to a stationary 
frame of reference. 
scintillation. The rapid changes in irradiance levels in a 
cross-section of a laser beam. 
secured enclosure. An enclosure to which casual access 
is impeded by an appropriate means, e.g., a door secured 
by a magnetically or electrically operated lock or latch, 
or by fasteners that need a tool to remove. 
service. The performance of those procedures or 
adjustments described in the manufacturer's service 
instructions which may affect any aspect of the 
performance of the laser or laser system. It does not 
include maintenance or operation as defined in this section. 
shall. The word “shall” is to be understood as mandatory. 
should. The word “should” is to be understood as advisory. 
small source. In this document, a source with an 
angular subtense at the cornea equal to or less than 
alpha-min (αmin), i.e., ≤ than 1.5 mrad. This includes all 
sources formerly referred to as “point sources” and 
meeting small-source viewing (formerly called point 
source or intrabeam viewing) conditions. (See Section 
8.1 for criteria). 
small-source viewing. The viewing condition whereby 
the angular subtense of the source, αmin, is equal to or 
less than the limiting angular subtense, αmin (See Section 
8.1 for criteria). 
NOTE: Small-source viewing was formerly called “intrabeam” 
viewing. 
solid angle. The three-dimensional angular spread at the 
vertex of a cone measured by the area intercepted by the 
cone on a unit sphere whose center is the vertex of the 
cone. Solid angle is expressed in steradians (sr). 
source. A laser or a laser-illuminated reflecting surface. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
spectator. An individual who wishes to observe or watch 
a laser or laser system in operation, and who may lack the 
appropriate laser safety training. 
specular reflection. A mirror-like reflection. 
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARD Z136.1 - 2000 
8 
steradian (sr). The unit of measure for a solid angle. 
There are 4π steradians about any point in space. 
standard operating procedure (SOP). Formal written 
description of the safety and administrative procedures to 
be followed in performing a specific task. 
stromal haze (of the cornea). Cloudiness in the 
connective tissue or main body of the cornea. 
surface exfoliation (of the cornea). A stripping or peeling 
off of the surface layer of cells from the cornea. 
synergism. A condition in which the combined effect is 
greater than the sum of the effects of individual 
contributors. 
T1. The exposure duration (time) at which MPEs based 
upon thermal injury are replaced by MPEs based upon 
photochemical injury to the retina. 
T2. The exposure duration (time) beyond which extended- source MPEs based upon thermal injury are 
expressed as a 
constant irradiance. 
threshold limit (TL). In this standard, the term is 
applied to laser protective eyewear filters, protective 
windows, and barriers. The TL is an expression of the 
“resistance factor” for beam penetration of a laser 
protective device. This is generally related by the 
Threshold Limit (TL) of the protective device (expressed 
in W⋅cm-2 or J⋅cm-2). It is the maximum average 
irradiance (or radiant exposure) at a given beam diameter 
for which a laser protective device (e.g. filter, window, 
barrier, etc.) provides adequate beam resistance. Thus, 
laser exposures delivered on the protective device at or 
below the TL will limit beam penetration to levels at or 
below the applicable MPE. 
Tmax. See limiting exposure duration. 
t 
min. For a pulsed laser, the maximum duration for which 
the MPE is the same as the MPE for a 1 ns exposure. For 
thermal biological effects, this corresponds to the “thermal 
confinement duration” during which heat flow does not 
significantly change the absorbed energy content of the 
thermal relaxation volume of the irradiated tissue 
(Example: tmin is 18 µs in the spectral region 0.4 to 1.05 µm 
and is 50 µs between 1.050 and 1.400 µm). 
tonometry. Measurement of the pressure (tension) of the 
eyeball. 
transmission. Passage of radiation through a medium. 
transmittance. The ratio of transmitted power to 
incident power. 
ultraviolet radiation. Electromagnetic radiation with 
wavelengths shorter than those of visible radiation; for the 
purpose of this standard, 0.18 to 0.4 µm. 

--- PAGE 10 ---
uncontrolled area. An area where the occupancy and 
activity of those within is not subject to control and 
supervision for the purpose of protection from radiation 
hazards. 
viewing window. Visually transparent parts of 
enclosures that contain laser processes. It may be 
possible to observe the laser processes through the 
viewing windows. 
visible radiation (light). In this standard, the term is used 
to describe electromagnetic radiation which can be detected 
by the human eye. This term is commonly used to describe 
wavelengths which lie in the range 0.4 to 0.7 µm. 
watt (W). The unit of power or radiant flux. 1 watt = 1 
joule-per-second. 
wavelength. The distance between two successive points 
on a periodic wave which have the same phase. 
work practices. Procedures used to accomplish a task. 
 